	THE PROJECT GUTENBERG CD AND DVD IMAGE README.TXT FILE

This is a general-purpose README file for Project Gutenberg CD and DVD
images.  We wrote it because there are many different ways to get a CD
or DVD image, and several things that can go wrong.


GIVE THEM AWAY! *

Project Gutenberg urges everyone who can to download and make copies
of their CD and DVD images.  Give them away!  If you decide to try to
sell them, first read the trademark license at
http://gutenberg.net/license .  If you want a CD or DVD but don't have
a burner or can't download so much data, see
http://gutenberg.net/cdproject where options for getting one freely or
at low cost are listed.


WHAT'S AN ISO?

First, you should know what a ISO image file is.  This is a special
file that represents the contents of an entire CD or DVD.  Project
Gutenberg uses ISOs to distribute entire sets of Project Gutenberg
eBooks, usually with some sort of index file and a copy of
GUTINDEX.ALL (our title listing).  All of the books on the CD or DVD
are available individually via the Web pages at http://gutenberg.net

Computers with CD or DVD burners usually come with some software to
copy the ISO to a CD or DVD that you can then use in any CD or DVD
burner.  Some software even allows you to look at the contents of the
ISO file without burning it to disc first.  Project Gutenberg does not
try to maintain lists of software, but there are many such lists on
the Web.  You can always email Project Gutenberg for help, if you are
stuck.


DEALING WITH LARGE FILES

ISO files can be quite large, which can create some problems. ** If you
have a high speed network connection (at least cable modem or DSL
speed), you can try downloading an entire ISO file all at once.  The
problem is that if any data get corrupted during the download
(something that seems to happen a lot on cable modems and DSL lines),
the ISO might not work at all.

- To make it easier to make sure your download is correct, you can get
the ISO in smaller chunks, and use checksums to verify the integrity
of the files.  We supply md5sums, and sometimes other checksums. 
If you don't have an md5sum command, use your favorite search
engine to find one (no, Microsoft does not seem to make any standard
checksum programs available with its Windows operating systems).

For chunking, we often provide a "-parts" subdirectory where the file
might be divided into many chunks.  These files were created with the
Linux command 

	split --bytes=15000000 --suffix-length=4 pgdvd.iso pgdvd.iso.

Any Windows or Unix/Linux/BSD computer (including Mac OS X or later)
can reassemble parts using the Unix "cat" command or the Windows "copy
/b" command.  Sample commands follow.

For both, first "cd" to get to the directory where your "parts" files
were downloaded to.  Then:

To join them together on a Unix or Linux system, including Mac OS X
or later, simply:
        cat pgdvd.iso.???? > pgdvd.iso
 
then, to check integrity,
        md5sum pgdvd.iso
 
On Windows, this command should work (first get a command shell,
i.e., by "Start / Run / command", and cd to the right directory):
        copy /b pgdvd.iso.* pgdvd.iso
 
(Make sure that all of the iso files are in one directory.)
 
Checking file integrity on a Windows/DOS system requires the use of a
third-party application.  Searching the internet, and in particular
various software download sites, will give you several options for
an MD5sum program.

59d8a193874349181122ff52e2e3e114  is the correct sum.

See pgdvd.iso.md5  for the MD5 sums for individual files.

- The WinRAR program (for Windows computers) can be used to reassemble
.rar files, when available.

- The Jigdo program can be used to download and assemble files based
on instructions in a .jigdo file, when available.

- We are also encouraging BitTorrents.  Visit the CD project page
for current BitTorrent links.


FOR MORE INFORMATION

See the CD project page for further information, including the
possibility of using peer to peer transfer, BitTorrent, and other
options to get the DVD and CD images:
	http://gutenberg.net/cdproject

The Project Gutenberg contacts page at gutenberg.net includes
email addresses for help.

  THANKS for your interest in these CD and DVD images!  We hope
  you enjoy them, and consider redistributing them.


NOTES

* International Copyright

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (PGLAF) is committed
to complying with copyright laws.  PGLAF has not verified that all the
eBook files on these discs meet the copyright laws in countries
outside of the United States.  PGLAF recommends that you verify this
before using these files and requests that you advise us of any
problems by email to copyright AT pglaf.org

** A note on CD and DVD disc capacity.  It turns out that disk drive
manufacturers (including the people who make CD and DVD burners and
blank discs) measure disk space differently than the rest of the
computer world.  To them, 1MB, which is 1 megabyte, is 1,000,000
bytes.  For the rest of the computer world, 1MB is 1,046,576 bytes.
We mention this because people might read their DVD disc package and
expect it to hold 4.7GB, but be surprised to find it can only hold
about 4.37GB as the rest of the world measures space.
