The Project Gutenberg eBook, Poems of Sentiment, by Ella Wheeler Wilcox


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Poems of Sentiment


Author: Ella Wheeler Wilcox



Release Date: July 15, 2014  [eBook #6617]
[This file was first posted on December 31, 2002]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS OF SENTIMENT***


Transcribed from the 1919 Gay and Hancock edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                          [Picture: Book cover]





                            POEMS OF SENTIMENT


                                    BY
                           ELLA WHEELER WILCOX

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                           GAY AND HANCOCK LTD.
                    34 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN
                                  LONDON

                                   1919

                         [_All rights reserved_]

                                * * * * *

                             _Published_ 1909
             _Reprinted_ 1909 (_twice_), 1910 (_twice_), 1911
              [_twice_], 1912, 1913, 1914, 1916, 1918, 1919

                _N.B.—The only volumes of my poems issued_
               _with my approval in the British Empire are_
                  _published by_ MESSRS. GAY & HANCOCK.

                                                       ELLA WHEELER WILCOX




CONTENTS

                                    PAGE
Double Carnations                      1
Never Mind                             3
Two Women                              5
It All Will Come Out Right             7
A Warning                              9
Shrines                               10
The Watcher                           11
Swimming Song                         13
The Law                               15
Love, Time, and Will                  18
The Two Ages                          20
Couleur de Rose                       23
Last Love                             25
Life’s Track                          26
An Ode to Time                        28
Regret and Remorse                    31
Easter Morn                           32
Blind                                 33
The Yellow-covered Almanac            35
The Little White Hearse               38
Realisation                           40
Success                               41
The Lady and the Dame                 43
Heaven and Hell                       45
Love’s Supremacy                      46
The Eternal Will                      48
Insight                               50
A Woman’s Love                        52
The Pæan of Peace                     54
“Has Been”                            56
Duty’s Path                           57
March                                 59
The End of the Summer                 60
Sun Shadows                           63
“He that Looketh”                     64
An Erring Woman’s Love                65
A Song of Republics                   81
Memorial Day—1892                     85
When baby Souls Sail Out              87
To Another Woman’s Baby               89
Diamonds                              90
Rubies                                90
Sapphires                             91
Turquoise                             91
Reform                                92
A Minor Chord                         93
Death’s Protest                       94
September                             95
Wail of an Old-timer                  96
Was, Is, and Yet-to-be                98
Mistakes                             100
Dual                                 101
The All-creative Spark               103
Be not Content                       105
Action                               107
Two Roses                            108
Satiety                              110
A Solar Eclipse                      111
A Suggestion                         112
The Depths                           113
Life’s Opera                         114
The Salt Sea-wind                    115
New Year                             116
Concentration                        118
Thoughts                             119
Luck                                 120




DOUBLE CARNATIONS


      A wild Pink nestled in a garden bed,
   A rich Carnation flourished high above her,
      One day he chanced to see her pretty head
   And leaned and looked again, and grew to love her.

      The Moss (her humble mother) saw with fear
   The ardent glances of the princely stranger;
      With many an anxious thought and dewy tear
   She sought to hide her darling from this danger.

      The gardener-guardian of this noble bud
   A cruel trellis interposed between them.
      No common Pink should mate with royal blood,
   He said, and sought in every way to wean them.

      The poor Pink pined and faded day by day:
   Her restless lover from his prison bower
      Called in a priestly bee who passed that way,
   And sent a message to the sorrowing flower.

      The fainting Pink wept as the bee drew near,
   Droning his prayers, and begged him to confess her.
      Her weary mother, over-taxed by fear,
   Slept, while the priest leaned low to shrive and bless her.

      But lo! ere long the tale went creeping out,
   The rich Carnation and the Pink were married!
      The cunning bee had brought the thing about
   While Mamma Moss in Slumber’s arms had tarried.

      And proud descendants of that loving pair,
   The offspring of that true and ardent passion,
      Are famous for their beauty everywhere,
   And leaders in the floral world of fashion.




NEVER MIND


   Whatever your work and whatever its worth,
      No matter how strong or clever,
   Some one will sneer if you pause to hear,
      And scoff at your best endeavour.
   For the target art has a broad expanse,
      And wherever you chance to hit it,
   Though close be your aim to the bull’s-eye fame,
      There are those who will never admit it.

   Though the house applauds while the artist plays,
      And a smiling world adores him,
   Somebody is there with an ennuied air
      To say that the acting bores him.
   For the tower of art has a lofty spire,
      With many a stair and landing,
   And those who climb seem small oft-time
      To one at the bottom standing.

   So work along in your chosen niche
      With a steady purpose to nerve you;
   Let nothing men say who pass your way
      Relax your courage or swerve you.
   The idle will flock by the Temple of Art
      For just the pleasure of gazing;
   But climb to the top and do not stop,
      Though they may not all be praising.




TWO WOMEN


   I know two women, and one is chaste
   And cold as the snows on a winter waste,
   Stainless ever in act and thought
   (As a man, born dumb, in speech errs not).
   But she has malice toward her kind,
   A cruel tongue and a jealous mind.
   Void of pity and full of greed,
   She judges the world by her narrow creed;
   A brewer of quarrels, a breeder of hate,
   Yet she holds the key to “Society’s” Gate.

   The other woman, with heart of flame,
   Went mad for a love that marred her name:
   And out of the grave of her murdered faith
   She rose like a soul that has passed through death.
   Her aims are noble, her pity so broad,
   It covers the world like the mercy of God.
   A soother of discord, a healer of woes,
   Peace follows her footsteps wherever she goes.
   The worthier life of the two, no doubt,
   And yet “Society” locks her out.




IT ALL WILL COME OUT RIGHT


   Whatever is a cruel wrong,
      Whatever is unjust,
   The honest years that speed along
      Will trample in the dust.
   In restless youth I railed at fate
      With all my puny might,
   But now I know if I but wait
      It all will come out right.

   Though Vice may don the judge’s gown
      And play the censor’s part,
   And Fact be cowed by Falsehood’s frown
      And Nature ruled by art;
   Though Labour toils through blinding tears
      And idle Wealth is might,
   I know the honest, earnest years
      Will bring it all out right.

   Though poor and loveless creeds may pass
      For pure religion’s gold;
   Though ignorance may rule the mass
      While truth meets glances cold,
   I know a law complete, sublime,
      Controls us with its might,
   And in God’s own appointed time
      It all will come out right.




A WARNING


   There was a flame, oh! such a tiny flame—
      One fleeting hour had spanned its birth and death,
      But for a silly child with playful breath
   Who fanned it into fury.  It became
   A mighty conflagration.  Ah, the cost!
   House, home, and thoughtless child alike were lost.

   Lady beware.  Fan not the harmless glow
      Of admiration into ardent love,
      Lean not with red curled smiling lips above
   The flickering spark of sinless flame, and blow,
   Lest in the sudden waking of desire
   Thou, like the child, shalt perish in the fire.




SHRINES


   About a holy shrine or sacred place,
      Where many hearts have bowed in earnest prayer,
   The loveliest spirits congregate from space,
      And bring their sweet, uplifting influence there.

   If in your chamber you pray oft and well,
      Soon will these angel-messengers arrive
   And make their home with you, and where they dwell
      All worthy toil and purposes shall thrive.

   I know a humble, plainly furnished room,
      So thronged with presences serene and bright,
   The heaviest heart therein forgets its gloom
      As in some gorgeous temple filled with light.

   Those heavenly spirits, beauteous and divine,
      Live only in an atmosphere of prayer;
   Make for yourself a sacred, fervent shrine,
      And you will find them swiftly flocking there.




THE WATCHER


   She gave her soul and body for a carriage,
      And livened lackey with a vacant grin,
   And all the rest—house, lands—and called it marriage:
      The bargain made, a husband was thrown in.

   And now, despite her luxury, she’s faded,
      Gone is the bloom that was so fresh and bright;
   She has the dark-rimmed eye, the countenance jaded,
      Of one who watches with the sick at night.

   Ah, heaven, she does! her sick heart, sick and dying,
      Beyond the aid of human skill to save,
   In that cold room her breast is hourly lying,
      And her grim thoughts crowd near to dig its grave.

   And yet it lingers, suffering and wailing,
      As sick hearts will that feed upon despair,
   And that lone watcher, unrelieved, is paling
      With vigils that no pitying soul can share.

   Ah, lady! it is hardly what you thought it,
      This life of luxury and social power;
   You gave yourself as principal, and bought it,
      But God extracts the interest hour by hour.




SWIMMING SONG


      I am coming, coming to thee,
      My strong-armed lover, the Sea!
   On thy great broad breast I will lie and rest,
      And thou shalt talk to me.

      I have come to thee, all unsought,
      I have stolen an hour from thought,
   And peace and power thou canst give in that hour,
      Which thy rival Earth gives not.

      Alone here, under the sky,
      And the whole world drifting by!
   Thy breast of brine thrills close to mine,
      While the cloudless sun sails high.

      I fly, but thou givest chase—
      Thy kisses are on my face!
   Be bold and free as thou wilt, O Sea,
      There is life in thy close embrace.

      Throat and cheek and tress
      Are damp where thy salt lips press!
   There is strength and bliss in thy daring kiss,
      And joy in thy bold caress.

      And what is the Earth to me!
      I have left it all, O Sea!
   With its dust and soil and strife and toil,
      For one glad hour with thee.




THE LAW


   The sun may be clouded, yet ever the sun
   Will sweep on its course till the cycle is run.
   And when into chaos the systems are hurled,
   Again shall the Builder reshape a new world.

   Your path may be clouded, uncertain your goal;
   Move on, for the orbit is fixed for your soul.
   And though it may lead into darkness of night,
   The torch of the Builder shall give it new light.

   You were, and you will be: know this while you are.
   Your spirit has travelled both long and afar.
   It came from the Source, to the Source it returns;
   The spark that was lighted, eternally burns.

   It slept in the jewel, it leaped in the wave,
   It roamed in the forest, it rose in the grave,
   It took on strange garbs for long æons of years,
   And now in the soul of yourself it appears.

   From body to body your spirit speeds on;
   It seeks a new form when the old one is gone;
   And the form that it finds is the fabric you wrought
   On the loom of the mind, with the fibre of thought.

   As dew is drawn upward, in rain to descend,
   Your thoughts drift away and in destiny blend.
   You cannot escape them; or petty, or great,
   Or evil, or noble, they fashion your fate.

   Somewhere on some planet, sometime and somehow,
   Your life will reflect all the thoughts of your now.
   The law is unerring; no blood can atone;
   The structure you rear you must live in alone.

   From cycle to cycle, through time and through space,
   Your lives with your longings will ever keep pace.
   And all that you ask for, and all you desire,
   Must come at your bidding, as flames out of fire.

   Once list to that voice and all tumult is done,
   Your life is the life of the Infinite One;
   In the hurrying race you are conscious of pause,
   With love for the purpose and love for the cause.

   You are your own devil, you are your own God,
   You fashioned the paths that your footsteps have trod,
   And no one can save you from error or sin,
   Until you shall hark to the Spirit within.




LOVE, TIME, AND WILL


   A soul immortal, Time, God everywhere,
   Without, within—how can a heart despair,
   Or talk of failure, obstacles, and doubt?
   (What proofs of God?  The little seeds that sprout,
   Life, and the solar system, and their laws.
   Nature?  Ah, yes; but what was Nature’s cause?)

   All mighty words are short: God, life, and death,
   War, peace, and truth, are uttered in a breath.
   And briefly said are love, and will, and time;
   Yet in them lies a majesty sublime.

   Love is the vast constructive power of space;
   Time is the hour which calls it into place;
   Will is the means of using time and love,
   And bringing forth the heart’s desires thereof.

   The way is love, the time is now, and will
   The patient method.  Let this knowledge fill
   Thy consciousness, and fate and circumstance,
   Environment, and all the ills of chance
   Must yield before the concentrated might
   Of those three words, as shadows yield to light.

   Go, charge thyself with love; be infinite
   And opulent with thy large use of it:
   ’Tis from free sowing that full harvest springs;
   Love God and life and all created things.

   Learn time’s great value; to this mandate bow,
   The hour of opportunity is Now,
   And from thy will, as from a well-strung bow,
   Let the swift arrows of thy wishes go.
   Though sent into the distance and the dark,
   The dawn shall prove thy arrows hit the mark.




THE TWO AGES


   On great cathedral window I have seen
   A summer sunset swoon and sink away,
   Lost in the splendours of immortal art.
   Angels and saints and all the heavenly hosts,
   With smiles undimmed by half a thousand years,
   From wall and niche have met my lifted gaze.
   Sculpture and carving and illumined page,
   And the fair, lofty dreams of architects,
   That speak of beauty to the centuries—
   All these have fed me with divine repasts.
   Yet in my mouth is left a bitter taste,
   The taste of blood that stained that age of art.

   Those glorious windows shine upon the black
   And hideous structure of the guillotine;
   Beside the haloed countenance of saints
   There hangs the multiple and knotted lash.
   The Christ of love, benign and beautiful,
   Looks at the torture-rack, by hate conceived
   And bigotry sustained.  The prison cell,
   With blood-stained walls, where starving men went mad,
   Lies under turrets matchless in their grace.

   God, what an age!  How was it that You let
   Colossal genius and colossal crime
   Walk for a hundred years across the earth,
   Like giant twins?  How was it then that men,
   Conceiving such vast beauty for the world,
   And such large hopes of heaven, could entertain
   Such hellish projects for their fellow-men?
   How could the hand that, with consummate skill
   And loving patience, limned the luminous page,
   Drop pen and brush, and seize the branding-rod,
   To scourge a brother for his differing faith?

   Not great this age in beauty or in art;
   Nothing is wrought to-day that shall endure,
   For earth’s adornment, through long centuries
   Not ours the fervid worship of a God
   That wastes its splendid opulence on glass,
   Leaving but hate, to give it mortal kin.
   Yet great this age: its mighty work is man
   Knowing himself, the universal life.
   And great our faith, which shows itself in works
   For human freedom and for racial good.
   The true religion lies in being kind.
   No age is greater than its faith is broad.
   Through liberty and love men climb to God.




COULEUR DE ROSE


   I want more lives in which to love
      This world so full of beauty,
   I want more days to use the ways
      I know of doing duty;
   I ask no greater joy than this
      (So much I am life’s lover),
   When I reach age to turn the page
      And read the story over.
      (O love, stay near!)

   O rapturous promise of the Spring!
      O June fulfilling after!
   If Autumns sigh, when Summers die,
      ’Tis drowned in Winter’s laughter.
   O maiden dawns, O wifely noons,
      O siren sweet, sweet nights,
   I’d want no heaven could earth be given
      Again with its delights
      (If love stayed near).

   There are such glories for the eye,
      Such pleasures for the ear,
   The senses reel with all they feel
      And see and taste and hear;
   There are such ways of doing good,
      Such ways of being kind,
   And bread that’s cast on waters fast
      Comes home again, I find.
      (O love, stay near.)

   There are such royal souls to know,
      There is so much to learn,
   While secrets rest in Nature’s breast
      And unnamed stars still burn.
   God toiled six days to make this earth,
      I think the good folks say—
   Six lives we need to give full meed
      Of praise—one for each day
      (If love stay near).

   But oh! if love fled far away,
      Or veiled his face from me,
   One life too much, why then were such
      A life as this would be.
   With sullen May and blighted June,
      Blurred dawn and haggard night,
   This dear old world in space were hurled
      If love lent not his light.
      (O love, stay near!)




LAST LOVE


   The first flower of the spring is not so fair
   Or bright as one the ripe midsummer brings.
   The first faint note the forest warbler sings
   Is not as rich with feeling, or so rare
   As when, full master of his art, the air
   Drowns in the liquid sea of song he flings
   Like silver spray from beak, and breast, and wings.
   The artist’s earliest effort, wrought with care,
   The bard’s first ballad, written in his tears,
   Set by his later toil, seems poor and tame,
   And into nothing dwindles at the test.
   So with the passions of maturer years.
   Let those who will demand the first fond flame,
   Give me the heart’s _last love_, for that is best.




LIFE’S TRACK


   This game of life is a dangerous play,
   Each human soul must watch alway,
      From the first to the very last.
   I care not however strong and pure—
   Let no man say he is perfectly sure
      The dangerous reefs are past.

   For many a rock may lurk near by,
   That never is seen when the tide is high—
      Let no man dare to boast,
   When the hand is full of trumps—beware,
   For that is the time when thought and care
      And nerve are needed most.

   As the oldest jockey knows to his cost,
   Full many a well-run race is lost
      A brief half length from the wire.
   And many a soul that has fought with sin,
   And gained each battle, at last gives in
      To sudden, fierce desire.

   And vain seems the effort of spur and whip,
   Or the hoarse, hot cry of the pallid lip,
      When once we have fallen back.
   It is better to keep on stirrup and rein,
   The steady poise and the careful strain,
      In speeding along Life’s track.

   A watchful eye and a strong, true hand
   Will carry us under the Judge’s stand,
      If prayer, too, does its part;
   And little by little the struggling soul
   Will grow and strengthen and gain control
      Over the passionate heart.




AN ODE TO TIME


   Ho! sportsman Time, whose chargers fleet
      The moments, madly driven,
   Beat in the dust beneath their feet
      Sweet hopes that years have given;
   Turn, turn aside those reckless steeds,
      Oh! do not urge them my way;
   There’s nothing that Time wants or needs
      In this contented by-way.

   You have down-trodden, in your race,
      So much that proves your power,
   Why not avoid my humble place?
      Why rob me of my dower?
   With your vast cellars, cavern deep,
      Packed tier on tier with treasures,
   You would not miss them should I _keep_
      My little store of pleasures.

   As one who, frightened, flying, flings
      Her riches down at random,
   Your course is paved with precious things
      Life casts before your tandem:
   The warrior’s fame, the conqueror’s crown,
      Great creeds for ages cherished,
   Beneath your chariot-wheels were thrown,
      And, crushed to earth, they perished.

   Although to just and generous deeds
      Your heart is not a stranger,
   I have the feeling that one needs
      To guard his wealth from danger.
   And though a most heroic light
      Oft on your pathway lingers,
   I’d hide my treasures, if I might,
      From contact with your fingers.

   You are the loyal friend of Truth,
      Go seek her, make her stronger,
   And leave the remnant of my youth
      To me a little longer.
   There’s work enough for you before
      Eternity shall wed you:
   Why stoop to steal my simple store?
      Why make me shun and dread you?

   You do not need my joys, I say,
      Home, love, and friends united—
   I beg you turn and go the way
      Where wrong waits to be righted;
   Or pause, and let us chat a while:
      I’ll listen—not too near you,
   For oh! no matter how you smile,
      I fear you, Time, I fear you!




REGRET AND REMORSE


   Regret with streaming eyes doth seem alway
   A maiden widowed on her wedding day.

   While dark Remorse, with eyes too sad for tears,
   A crushed, desponding Magdalene appears.

   One, with a hungering heart unsatisfied,
   Mourns for imagined joys that were denied.

   The other, pierced by recollected sin,
   Broods o’er the scars of pleasures that have been.




EASTER MORN


   A truth that has long lain buried
      At Superstition’s door,
   I see, in the dawn uprising
      In all its strength once more.

   Hidden away in the darkness,
      By Ignorance crucified,
   Crushed under stones of dogmas—
      Yet lo! it has not died.

   It stands in the light transfigured,
      It speaks from the heights above,
   “_Each soul is its own redeemer_;
      _There is no law but Love_.”

   And the spirits of men are gladdened
      As they welcome this Truth re-born
   With its feet on the grave of Error
      And its eyes to the Easter Morn.




BLIND


   Whatever a man may think or feel
      He can tell to the world and it hears aright;
   But it bids the woman conceal, conceal,
      And woe to the thoughts that at last ignite.
   She may serve up gossip or dwell on fashion,
      Or play the critic with speech unkind,
   But alas for the woman who speaks with passion!
      For the world is blind—for the world is blind.

   It is woman who sits with her starved desire,
      And drinks to sorrow in cups of tears;
   She reads by the light of her soul on fire
      The secrets of love through lonely years:
   But out of all she has felt or heard
      Or read by the glow of her soul’s white flame,
   If she dare but utter aloud one word—
      How the world cries shame!—how the world cries shame!

   It cannot distinguish between the glow
      Of a gleaming star, in the sky of gold,
   Or a spent cigar in the dust below—
      ’Twixt unclad Eve or a wanton bold;
   And ever if woman speaks what she feels
      (And feels consistent with God’s great plan)
   It has cast her under its juggernaut wheels,
      Since the world began—since the world began.




THE YELLOW-COVERED ALMANAC


   I left the farm when mother died and changed my place of dwelling
      To daughter Susie’s stylish house right on the city street:
   And there was them before I came that sort of scared me, telling
      How I would find the town folks’ ways so difficult to meet;
   They said I’d have no comfort in the rustling, fixed-up throng,
      And I’d have to wear stiff collars every week-day, right along.

   I find I take to city ways just like a duck to water;
      I like the racket and the noise and never tire of shows;
   And there’s no end of comfort in the mansion of my daughter,
      And everything is right at hand and money freely flows;
   And hired help is all about, just listenin’ to my call—
      But I miss the yellow almanac off my old kitchen wall.

   The house is full of calendars from attic to the cellar,
      They’re painted in all colours and are fancy like to see,
   But in this one particular I’m not a modern feller,
      And the yellow-coloured almanac is good enough for me.
   I’m used to it, I’ve seen it round from boyhood to old age,
      And I rather like the jokin’ at the bottom of the cage.

   I like the way its “S” stood out to show the week’s beginning,
      (In these new-fangled calendars the days seem sort of mixed),
   And the man upon the cover, though he wa’n’t exactly winnin’,
      With lungs and liver all exposed, still showed how we are fixed;
   And the letters and credentials that was writ to Mr. Ayer
      I’ve often on a rainy day found readin’ pretty fair.

   I tried to buy one recently; there wa’n’t none in the city!
      They toted out great calendars, in every shape and style.
   I looked at ’em in cold disdain, and answered ’em in pity—
      “I’d rather have my almanac than all that costly pile.”
   And though I take to city life, I’m lonesome after all
      For that old yellow almanac upon my kitchen wall.




THE LITTLE WHITE HEARSE


   Somebody’s baby was buried to-day—
      The empty white hearse from the grave rumbled back,
   And the morning somehow seemed less smiling and gay
   As I paused on the walk while it crossed on its way,
      And a shadow seemed drawn o’er the sun’s golden tract.

   Somebody’s baby was laid out to rest,
      White as a snowdrop, and fair to behold,
   And the soft little hands were crossed over the breast,
   And those hands and the lips and the eyelids were pressed
      With kisses as hot as the eyelids were cold.

   Somebody saw it go out of her sight,
      Under the coffin lid—out through the door;
   Somebody finds only darkness and blight
   All through the glory of summer-sun light;
      Somebody’s baby will waken no more.

   Somebody’s sorrow is making me weep:
      I know not her name, but I echo her cry,
   For the dearly bought baby she longed so to keep,
   The baby that rode to its long-lasting sleep
      In the little white hearse that went rumbling by.

   I know not her name, but her sorrow I know;
      While I paused on the crossing I lived it once more,
   And back to my heart surged that river of woe
   That but in the breast of a mother can flow;
      For the little white hearse has been, too, at _my_ door.




REALISATION
(At the Old Homestead)


   I tread the paths of earlier times
   Where all my steps were set to rhymes.

   I gaze on scenes I used to see
   When dreaming of a vague To be.

   I walk in ways made bright of old
   By hopes youth-limned in hues of gold.

   But lo! those hopes of future bliss
   Seem dull beside the joy that _is_.

   My noonday skies are far more bright
   Than those dreamed of in morning’s light,

   And life gives me more joys to hold
   Than all it promised me of old.




SUCCESS


   As we gaze up life’s slope, as we gaze
      In the morn, ere the dewdrops are dry,
   What splendour hangs over the ways,
      What glory gleams there in the sky,
      What pleasures seem waiting us, high
   On the peak of that beauteous slope,
   What rainbow-hued colours of hope,
         As we gaze!

   As we climb up the hill, as we climb,
      Our hearts, our illusions, are rent:
   For Fate, who is spouse of old Time,
      Is jealous of youth and content.
      With brows that are brooding and bent
   She shadows our sunlight of gold,
   And the way grows lonely and cold
         As we climb.

   As we toil on, through trouble and pain,
      There are hands that will shelter and feed;
   But once let us dare to _attain_—
      They will bruise our bare hearts till they bleed.
      ’Tis the worst of all crimes to succeed,
   Know this as ye feast on a crust,
   Know this in the darkness and dust,
         Ye who climb.

   As we stand on the heights of success,
      Lo! success seems as sad as defeat!
   Through the lives we may succour and bless
      Alone may its litter turn sweet!
      And the world lying there at our feet,
   With its cavilling praise and its sneer,
   We must pity, condone, but not hear,
         Where we stand.

   As we live on those heights, we must live
      With the courage and pride of a god;
   For the world, it has nothing to give
      But the scourge of the lash and the rod.
      Our thoughts must be noble and broad,
   Our purpose must challenge men’s gaze,
   While we seek not their blame or their praise
         As we live.




THE LADY AND THE DAME


   So, thou hast the art, good dame, thou swearest,
      To keep Time’s perishing touch at bay
   From the roseate splendour of the cheek so tender,
      And the silver threads from the gold away.
   And the tell-tale years that have hurried by us
      Shall tip-toe back, and, with kind good-will,
   They shall take the traces from off our faces,
      If we will trust to thy magic skill.

   Thou speakest fairly; but if I listen
      And buy thy secret, and prove its truth,
   Hast thou the potion and magic lotion
      To give me also the _heart_ of youth?
   With the cheek of rose and the eye of beauty,
      And the lustrous looks of life’s lost prime,
   Wilt thou bring thronging each hope and longing
      That made the glory of that dead Time?

   When the sap in the trees sets young buds bursting,
      And the song of the birds fills the air like spray,
   Will rivers of feeling come once more stealing
      From the beautiful hills of the far-away?
   Wilt thou demolish the tower of reason,
      And fling for ever down into the dust
   The caution time brought me, the lessons life taught me,
      And put in their places my old sweet trust?

   If Time’s foot-print from my brow is driven,
      Canst thou, too, take with thy subtle powers
   The burden of thinking, and let me go drinking
      The careless pleasures of youth’s bright hours?
   If silver threads from my tresses vanish,
      If a glow once more in my pale cheek gleams,
   Wilt thou slay duty and give back the beauty
      Of days untroubled by aught but dreams?

   When the soft fair arms of the siren Summer
      Encircle the earth in their languorous fold,
   Will vast, deep oceans of sweet emotions
      Surge through my veins as they surged of old?
   Canst thou bring back from a day long-vanished
      The leaping pulse and the boundless aim?
   I will pay thee double, for all thy trouble,
      If thou wilt restore all these, good dame.




HEAVEN AND HELL


   While forced to dwell apart from thy dear face,
      Love, robed like sorrow, led me by the hand
      And taught my doubting heart to understand
   That which has puzzled all the human race.
   Full many a sage has questioned where in space
      Those counter worlds were? where the mystic strand
      That separates them?  I have found each land,
   And Hell is vast, and Heaven a narrow space.

   In the small compass of thy clasping arms,
      In reach and sight of thy dear lips and eyes,
      There, there for me the joy of Heaven lies.
   Outside, lo! chaos, terrors’ wild alarms,
   And all the desolation fierce and fell
   Of void and aching nothingness, makes Hell.




LOVE’S SUPREMACY


   As yon great Sun in his supreme condition
      Absorbs small worlds and makes them all his own,
   So does my love absorb each vain ambition,
      Each outside purpose which my life has known.
   Stars cannot shine so near that vast orb’d splendour;
      They are content to feed his flames of fire:
   And so my heart is satisfied to render
      Its strength, its all, to meet thy strong desire.

   As in a forest when dead leaves are falling
      From all save some perennial green tree,
   So one by one I find all pleasures palling
      That are not linked with or enjoyed by thee.
   And all the homage that the world may proffer,
      I take as perfumed oils or incense sweet,
   And think of it as one thing more to offer,
      And sacrifice to Love, at thy dear feet.

   I love myself because thou art my lover,
      My name seems dear since uttered by thy voice;
   Yet, argus-eyed, I watch and would discover
      Each blemish in the object of thy choice.
   I coldly sit in judgment on each error,
      To my soul’s gaze I hold each fault of me,
   Until my pride is lost in abject terror,
      Lest I become inadequate to thee.

   Like some swift-rushing and sea-seeking river,
      Which gathers force the farther on it goes,
   So does the current of my love forever
      Find added strength and beauty as it flows.
   The more I give, the more remains for giving,
      The more receive, the more remains to win.
   Ah! only in eternities of living
      Will life be long enough to love thee in.




THE ETERNAL WILL


   There is no thing we cannot overcome
      Say not thy evil instinct is inherited,
   Or that some trait inborn makes thy whole life forlorn,
      And calls down punishment that is not merited.

   Back of thy parents and grandparents lies
      The Great Eternal Will.  That, too, is thine
      Inheritance; strong, beautiful, divine,
   Sure lever of success for one who tries.

   Pry up thy faults with this great lever, Will.
      However deeply bedded in propensity,
   However firmly set, I tell thee firmer yet
      Is that vast power that comes from Truth’s immensity.

   Thou art a part of that strange world, I say.
      Its forces lie within thee, stronger far
      Than all thy mortal sins and frailties are,
   Believe thyself divine, and watch, and pray.

   There is no noble height thou canst not climb.
      All triumphs may be thine in Time’s futurity,
   If whatso’er thy fault, thou dost not faint or halt,
      But lean upon the staff of God’s security.

   Earth has no claim the soul can not contest.
      Know thyself part of that Eternal Source,
      And naught can stand before thy spirit’s force.
   The soul’s divine inheritance is best.




INSIGHT


   On the river of life, as I float along,
      I see with the spirit’s sight
   That many a nauseous weed of wrong
      Has root in a seed of right.
   For evil is good that has gone astray,
      And sorrow is only blindness,
   And the world is always under the sway
      Of a changeless law of kindness.

   The commonest error a truth can make
      Is shouting its sweet voice hoarse,
   And sin is only the soul’s mistake
      In misdirecting its force.
   And love, the fairest of all fair things
      That ever to man descended,
   Grows rank with nettles and poisonous things
      Unless it is watched and tended.

   There could not be anything better than this
      Old world in the way it began;
   And though some matters have gone amiss
      From the great original plan,
   And however dark the skies may appear,
      And however souls may blunder,
   I tell you it all will work out clear,
      For good lies over and under.




A WOMAN’S LOVE


   So vast the tide of love within me surging,
      It overflows like some stupendous sea,
      The confines of the Present and To-be;
   And ’gainst the Past’s high wall I feel it urging,
      As it would cry, “Thou, too, shalt yield to me!”

   All other loves my supreme love embodies;
      I would be she on whose soft bosom nursed
      Thy clinging infant lips to quench their thirst;
   She who trod close to hidden worlds where God is,
      That she might have, and hold, and see thee first.

   I would be she who stirred the vague, fond fancies
      Of thy still childish heart; who through bright days
      Went sporting with thee in the old-time plays,
   And caught the sunlight of thy boyish glances
      In half-forgotten and long-buried Mays.

   Forth to the end, and back to the beginning,
      My love would send its inundating tide,
      Wherein all landmarks of thy past should hide.
   If thy life’s lesson _must_ be learned through sinning,
      My grieving virtue would become thy guide.

   For I would share the burden of thy errors,
      So when the sun of our brief life had set,
      If thou didst walk in darkness and regret,
   E’en in that shadowy world of nameless terrors,
      My soul and thine should be companions yet.

   And I would cross with thee those troubled oceans
      Of dark remorse whose waters are despair:
      All things my jealous, reckless love would dare,
   So that thou mightst not recollect emotions
      In which it did not have a part and share.

   There is no limit to my love’s full measure,
      It’s spirit-gold is shaped by earth’s alloy;
      I would be friend and mother, mate and toy,
   I’d have thee look to me for every pleasure,
      And in me find all memories of joy.

   Yet though I love thee in such selfish fashion,
      I would wait on thee, sitting at thy feet,
      And serving thee, if thou didst deem it meet.
   And couldst thou give me one fond hour of passion,
      I’d take that hour and call my life complete.




THE PÆAN OF PEACE


   With ever some wrong to be righting,
      With self ever seeking for place,
   The world has been striving and fighting
      Since man was evolved out of space.
   Bold history into dark regions
      His torchlight has fearlessly cast,
   He shows us tribes warring in legions,
      In jungles of ages long passed.

   Religion, forgetting her station,
      Forgetting her birthright from God,
   Set nation to warring with nation
      And scattered dissension abroad.
   Dear creeds have made men kill each other,
      Fair faith has bred hate and despair,
   And brother has battled with brother
      Because of a difference in prayer.

   But earth has grown wiser and kinder,
      For man is evolving a soul:
   From wars of an age that was blinder,
      We rise to a peace-girdled goal.
   Where once men would murder in treason
      And slaughter each other in hordes,
   They now meet together and reason,
      With thoughts for their weapons, not swords.

   The brute in humanity dwindles
      And lessens as time speeds along,
   And the spark of Divinity kindles
      And blazes up brightly and strong.
   The seer can behold in the distance
      The race that shall people the world—
   Strong men of a godlike existence
      Unarmed, and with war banners furled.

   No longer the bloodthirsty savage
      Man’s vast spirit strength shall unfold;
   And tales of red warfare and ravage
      Shall seem like ghost stories of old.
   For the booming of guns and the rattle
      Of carnage and conflict shall cease,
   And the bugle-call, leading to battle,
      Shall change to a pæan of peace.




“HAS BEEN”


   That melancholy phrase “It might have been,”
      However sad, doth in its heart enfold
      A hidden germ of promise! for I hold
   _Whatever might have been shall be_.
         Though in
   Some other realm and life, the soul must win
      The goal that erst was possible.  But cold
      And cruel as the sound of frozen mould
   Dropped on a coffin, are the words “Has been.”

   “She has been beautiful”—“he has been great,”
      “Rome has been powerful,” we sigh and say.
      It is the pitying crust we toss decay,
   The dirge we breathe o’er some degenerate state,
   An epitaph for fame’s unburied dead.
   God pity those who live to hear it said!




DUTY’S PATH


   Out from the harbour of youth’s bay
      There leads the path of pleasure;
   With eager steps we walk that way
      To brim joy’s largest measure.
   But when with morn’s departing beam
      Goes youth’s last precious minute,
   We sigh “’Twas but a fevered dream—
      There’s nothing in it.”

   Then on our vision dawns afar
      The goal of glory, gleaming
   Like some great radiant solar star,
      And sets us longing, dreaming.
   Forgetting all things left behind,
      We strain each nerve to win it,
   But when ’tis ours—alas! we find
      There’s nothing in it.

   We turn our sad, reluctant gaze
      Upon the path of duty;
   Its barren, uninviting ways
      Are void of bloom and beauty.
   Yet in that road, though dark and cold,
      It seems as we begin it,
   As we press on—lo! we behold
      There’s Heaven in it.




MARCH


   Like some reformer, who with mien austere,
      Neglected dress, and loud insistent tones,
      More rasping than the wrongs which she bemoans,
   Walks through the land and wearies all who hear,
      While yet we know the need of such reform;
      So comes unlovely March, with wind and storm,
   To break the spell of winter, and set free
      The poisoned brooks and crocus beds oppressed.
      Severe of face, gaunt-armed, and wildly dressed,
   She is not fair nor beautiful to see.
      But merry April and sweet smiling May
      Come not till March has first prepared the way.




THE END OF THE SUMMER


   The birds laugh loud and long together
      When Fashion’s followers speed away
   At the first cool breath of autumn weather.
      Why, this is the time, cry the birds, to stay!
   When the deep calm sea and the deep sky over
      Both look their passion through sun-kissed space,
   As a blue-eyed maid and her blue-eyed lover
      Might each gaze into the other’s face.

   Oh! this is the time when careful spying
      Discovers the secrets Nature knows.
   You find when the butterflies plan for flying
      (Before the thrush or the blackbird goes),
   You see some day by the water’s edges
      A brilliant border of red and black;
   And then off over the hills and hedges
      It flutters away on the summer’s track.

   The shy little sumacs, in lonely places,
      Bowed all summer with dust and heat,
   Like clean-clad children with rain-washed faces,
      Are dressed in scarlet from head to feet.
   And never a flower had the boastful summer,
      In all the blossoms that decked her sod,
   So royal hued as that later comer
      The purple chum of the goldenrod.

   Some chill grey dawn you note with grieving
      That the King of Autumn is on his way.
   You see, with a sorrowful, slow believing,
      How the wanton woods have gone astray.
   They wear the stain of bold caresses,
      Of riotous revels with old King Frost;
   They dazzle all eyes with their gorgeous dresses,
      Nor care that their green young leaves are lost.

   A wet wind blows from the East one morning,
      The wood’s gay garments looked draggled out.
   You hear a sound, and your heart takes warning—
      The birds are planning their winter route.
   They wheel and settle and scold and wrangle,
      Their tempers are ruffled, their voices loud;
   Then _whirr_—and away in a feathered tangle,
      To fade in the south like a passing cloud.

                                 _Envoi_

   A songless wood stripped bare of glory—
      A sodden moor that is black and brown;
   The year has finished its last love-story:
      Oh! let us away to the gay bright town.




SUN SHADOWS


   There never was success so nobly gained,
      Or victory so free from selfish dross,
   But in the winning some one had been pained
      Or some one suffered loss.

   There never was so nobly planned a fête,
      Or festal throng with hearts on pleasure bent,
   But some neglected one outside the gate
      Wept tears of discontent.

   There never was a bridal morning fair
      With hope’s blue skies and love’s unclouded sun
   For two fond hearts, that did not bring despair
      To some sad other one.




“HE THAT LOOKETH”


   Yea, she and I have broken God’s command,
      And in His sight are branded with our shame.
      And yet I do not even know her name,
   Nor ever in my life have touched her hand
   Or brushed her garments.  But I chanced to stand
      Beside her in the throng!  A sweet, swift flame
      Shot from her flesh to mine—and hers the blame
   Of willing looks that fed it; aye, that fanned
   The glow within me to a hungry fire.
      There was an invitation in her eyes.
      Had she met mine with coldness or surprise,
   I had not plunged on headlong in the mire
   Of amorous thought.  The flame leaped high and higher;
      Her breath and mine pulsated into sighs,
      And soft glance melted into glance kiss-wise,
   And in God’s sight both yielded to desire.




AN ERRING WOMAN’S LOVE


PART I


   She was a light and wanton maid:
   Not one whom fickle Love betrayed,
   For indolence was her undoer.
   Fair, frivolous, and very poor,
   She scorned the thought of toil, in youth,
   And chose the path that leads from truth.

   More women fall from want of gold
   Than love leads wrong, if truth were told;
   More women sin for gay attire
   Than sin through passion’s blinding fire.
   Her god was gold: and gold she saw
   Prove mightier than the sternest law
   With judge and jury, priest and king;
   So, made herself an offering
   At Mammon’s shrine; and lived for power,
   And ease, and pleasures of the hour.

   Who looks beneath life’s outer crust
   Is satisfied that God is just;
   Who looks not under, but about,
   Finds much to make him sad with doubt.
   For Virtue walks with feet worn bare,
   While Sin rides by with coach and pair:
   Men praise the modest heart and chaste,
   And yet they let it go to waste,
   And follow, fierce to have and hold,
   Some creature, wanton, selfish, bold.

   She saw but this, life’s outer side,
   No higher faith was hers to guide;
   She worshipped gold, and hated toil,
   And hence her youth with all its soil,
   With all its sins too dark to name,
   Of secret crimes and public shame,
   With all its trail of broken lives,
   Of ruined homes, neglected wives,
   And weeping mothers.  Proud and gay
   She went her devastating way
   With untouched brow and fadeless grace.

   Not time, but feeling, marks the face.
   Sin on the outer being tells
   Not till the startled soul rebels:
   And she felt nothing but content.
   She was too light and indolent
   To worry over days to come.
   This little earth held all life’s sum,
   She thought, and to be young and fair,
   Well clothed, well fed, was all her care.
   With pitying eyes and lifted head
   She gazed on those who toiled for bread,
   And laughed to scorn the talk she heard
   Of punishment for those who erred,
   And virtue’s certain recompense.
   She seemed devoid of moral sense,
   An ignorant thing whose appetites
   Bound her horizon of delights.

   Men were her puppets to control;
   Unconscious of a heart or soul
   She lived, and gloried in the ease
   She purchased by her power to please
   The eye and senses.  Life’s one woe
   Which caused her pitying tears to flow
   Was poverty.  Though hearts might break
   And homes be ruined for her sake,
   She showed no mercy.  But when need
   Of gold she saw, her heart would bleed.
   The lack of clothing, fire, and food
   Was earth’s one pain, she understood.

   The suffering poor oft blest her name,
   Nor questioned whence the ducats came,
   She gave so freely.  Once she found
   A fainting woman on the ground,
   A wailing child clasped to her breast.
   With her own hands she bathed and dressed
   The weary waifs! gave food and gold
   And clothed them warmly from the cold,
   Nor guessed that one she lured from home
   Had caused that suffering pair to roam
   Unhoused, neglected.  Then one day,
   Unheralded across her way,
   The conqueror came.  She knew not why,
   But with the first glance of his eye
   A feeling, new and unexplained,
   Woke in her what she oft had feigned.
   And when his arm stole near her waist,
   As startled maidens blush with chaste
   Sweet fear at love’s advances, so
   She blushed from brow to breast of snow.
   Strange, new emotions, fraught with joy
   And pain commingled, made her coy;
   But when he would have clasped her neck
   With gems that might a queen bedeck
   And offered gold, her lips grew white
   With sudden anger at the sight
   Of what had been her god for years.
   She flung them from her.  Then such tears
   As only spring from love’s despair
   Welled from her eyes.  “So, lady fair,
   My gifts are scorned?” quoth he, and laughed.
   “Like Cleopatra, you have quaffed
   Such lordly pearls in draughts of wine,
   You spurn poor simple gems like mine.
   Well, well, fair queen, I’ll bring to you
   A richer gift next time.  Adieu.”

   His light words stung like lash of whip;
   With gasping breath and ashen lip
   She strove to speak, but he was gone
   She kneeled and pressed her mouth upon
   The latch his hand had touched, the floor
   His foot had trod, and o’er and o’er
   She sobbed his name, as children moan
   A mother’s name when left alone.

   Out from the dim and roseate gloom
   And subtle odours of her room
   Accusing memories rose.  She felt
   A loneliness that seemed to belt
   The universe in its embrace.
   It was as if from some high place
   A giant hand had reached and hurled
   To nothingness her petty world,
   And left her staring, awed, alone,
   Up into regions vast, unknown.
   There is no other loneliness
   That can so sadden and oppress
   As when beside the burned-out fire
   Of sated passion and desire
   The wakening spirit, in a glance,
   Beholds its lost inheritance.
   She rose and turned the dim lights higher,
   Brought forth rich gems and grand attire,
   And robed herself in feverish haste;
   Before the mirror posed and paced,
   With jewels on her breast and wrists;
   Then sudden clenched her little fists
   And beat her face until it bled,
   And tore her garments shred from shred,
   Gazed in the mirror, spoke her name
   And hissed a word that told her shame,
   Then on her knees fell sobbing there.

   There are sweet messengers of prayer
   Who down through space on soft wings steal,
   And offer aid to all who kneel.
   Her lips, unused to pious phrase,
   Recalled some words of bygone days,
   And “Now I lay me down to sleep,
   I pray the Lord my soul to keep,”
   She whispered timidly, and then,
   “Lord, let me be a child again
   And grow up good.”  The strange prayer said,
   Like some o’er-weary child, her head
   She pillowed on her arm, and wept
   Low, shuddering sobs, until she slept
   And dreamed; and in that dream she thought
   She sat within a vine-wreathed cot;
   An infant slumbered on her breast,
   She crooned a lullaby, and pressed
   Its waxen hand against her cheek,
   While one, too proud and fond to speak,
   The happy father of the child,
   Stood near, and gazing on them, smiled.

   She woke while still the lullaby
   Was on her lips—then such a cry,
   As souls in fabled realms below
   Might utter, voiced her awful woe.

   The mighty moral labour-pain
   Of new-born conscience wracked her brain
   And tore her soul.  She understood
   The meaning now of womanhood,
   And chastity, and o’er her came
   The full, dark sense of all her shame.
   As some poor drunken wretch, at night,
   Wakes up to know his piteous plight,
   And sees, while sinking in the mire,
   Afar, his waiting hearth-light’s fire;
   So now she saw from depths of sin
   The hearth-light of the might-have-been.
   How beautiful, how like a star
   That lost light shone, but ah, how far!

   She reached her longing arms toward space,
   And lifted up her tear-wet face.
   “O God,” she wailed, “I have been bad!
   I see it all, and I am sad,
   And long to be a good girl now.
   Lord, Lord, will some one show me how?
   Why, men have trod the burning track
   Of sin for years, and then gone back!
   And cannot I for sin atone,
   Or did Christ die for men alone?
   I want to lead an honest life,
   I want to be his own true wife
   And hold upon my breast his child.”
   Then suddenly her voice grew wild,
   “No, no,” she cried, “it could not be—
   Those infant eyes would torture me:
   Though God condoned my sinful ways,
   I could not meet my child’s pure gaze.”

   She hid her face upon her knees,
   And swayed as reeds sway in a breeze.
   “O Christ,” she moaned, “could I forget,
   There might be something for me yet:
   But though both God and man forgave,
   And I should win the love I crave,
   Why, memory would drive me mad.”

   When woman drifts from good to bad,
   To make her final fall complete,
   She puts her soul beneath her feet.
   Man’s dual selves seem separate;
   He leaves his soul outside sin’s gate,
   And finds it waiting when he tires
   Of carnal pleasures and desires,
   Depleted, sickened, and depressed,
   As souls must be with such a test,
   Yet strong enough to help him grope
   Back into happiness and hope.
   But woman, far more complicate,
   Can take no chances with her fate;
   A subtle creature, finely spun,
   Her body and her soul are one.
   And now this erring woman wept
   The soul she murdered while it slept.
   She felt too stunned with pain to think.
   She seemed to stand upon a brink;
   Behind her loomed the sinful past,
   Below her, rocks, beyond her, vast
   And awful darkness.  Not one ray
   Of sun or star to show the way!
   She drew a long and shuddering breath;
   “There is no other path but death
   For me to tread,” she sighed, “and so
   I will prepare my house and go.”

   As housewives move with willing feet
   And skilful hands to make things neat
   And ready for some welcome one,
   She toiled until her tasks were done.
   Then, seated at her desk, she wrote,
   With painful care, a tear-wet note.
   The childish penmanship was rude,
   Ill spelled the words, the phrasing crude;
   Yet thought and feeling both were there,
   And mighty love and great despair.
   “Dear heart,” it ran, “you did not know
   How, from the first, I loved you so,
   That sin grew hateful in my sight;
   And so I leave it all to-night.
   The kiss I gave, dear heart, to you
   Was love’s first kiss, as pure and true
   As ever lips of maiden gave.
   I think ’twill warm my lonely grave,
   And light the pathway I must tread
   Among the hapless, homeless dead.

   “When God formed worlds, He failed to make
   A path for erring feet to take
   Back into light and peace again,
   Unless they were the feet of men.
   When woman errs, and then regrets,
   Her sun of hope for ever sets,
   And life is hung with deepest gloom.
   In all the world there is no room
   For such as she; and so I hold
   That death itself is not so cold
   As life has seemed, since by love’s light
   I saw there was a wrong and right,
   And that my birthright had been sold,
   By my own hands, for tarnished gold.
   I hated labour, hence I fell;
   But now I love you, dear, so well,
   No greater boon my soul could crave
   Than just to toil, a galley-slave,
   Through burdened years and years of life,
   If at the last you called me wife
   For one supreme and honoured hour.
   Alas! too late I learn love’s power,
   Too late I realise my loss,
   And have no strength to bear my cross
   Of loneliness and dark disgrace.
   There cannot be another place
   So desolate, so full of fear,
   As earth to me, without you, dear.

   “You will not understand, I know,
   How one like me can love you so.
   It was a strange, strange thing.  Love came
   So like a swift, devouring flame
   And burned my frail, fair-weather boat
   And left me on the waves afloat,
   With nothing but a broken spar.
   The distant shores seem very far;
   I cannot reach them, so I sink.
   God will forgive my sins, I think,
   Because I die for love, like One
   The good Book tells about, His Son.

   “For erring woman death can bring
   No pain so keen as memory’s sting.
   Good-night, good-bye.  God bless you, dear,
   And give you love, and joy, and cheer!
   But sometimes, in the dark night, say
   A prayer for one who went astray,
   And found no pathway back, and died
   For love of you—a suicide.”

   When morn his glorious pinions spread,
   They found the erring woman, dead.



PART II


   She woke as one wakes from a deep
   And dreamless, yet exhausting, sleep.

   A strange confusion filled her mind,
   And sorrows vague and undefined,

   Like half-remembered faces pressed
   To memory’s window, in her breast,

   Gazed at her with reproachful eyes.
   She felt a sudden, dazed surprise,

   Commingled with a sense of dread,
   “I did but sleep—I am not dead,

   “The potion and the purpose failed,
   And I still live,” she wildly wailed.

   “Nay, thou art dead, rash suicide,”
   A sad voice spake: and at her side

   She saw a weird and shadowy crowd
   With anguished lips, and shoulders bowed,

   And orbs that seemed the wells of woe.
   She shrieked and veiled her eyes.  “No, no!

   “I am not dead!  I ache with life.
   An earthly passion’s hopeless strife

   “Still tortures me.”  “Yet thou art dead,”
   The voice with sad insistence said.

   “But love and sorrow and regret
   All die with death.  _I_ feel them yet.”

   “God bade thee live, and only He
   Can say when thou shalt cease to be.”

   “But I was sin-sick, sad, alone—
   I thought by death I could atone,

   “And died that Christ might show me how.”
   “Christ bore His burden, why not thou?”

   “Oh! lead me to His holy feet
   And let my penance be complete.”

   “What! thinkest thou to find that path—
   Thou who hast tempted Heaven’s wrath

   “By thy rash deed?  Nay, nay, not so,
   ’Tis but perfected spirits go

   “To that supreme and final goal.
   A self-sought death delays the soul.

   “With yonder shuddering, woeful throng
   Of suicides thy ways belong.

   “Close to the earth a shadowy band,
   Unseen, but seeing all, they stand

   “Until their natural time to die,
   As God intended, shall draw nigh.

   “On earth, repentant, sick of sin,
   A ministering angel thou hadst been

   “Whose patient toil and deeds divine
   Had rescued souls as sad as thine,

   “Each deed a firm ascending stair
   To lead beyond thy great despair.

   “But now it is thy mournful fate
   To linger here and meditate

   “On thy dark past—to stand so near
   The earthly plane that thou canst hear

   “Thy lover’s voice, while old desire
   Shall burn within thee like a fire,

   “And grief shall root thee to the spot
   To find how soon thou art forgot.

   “But since thou hast endured the woes
   That only fragile woman knows,

   “And loved as only woman can,
   Thou shalt not suffer all that man

   “Must suffer when he interferes
   With God’s great law.  In death’s dim spheres

   “That justice waits, which men refuse.
   Thy sex shall in some part excuse

   “Thy desperate deed.  When God shall send
   A second death to be thy friend,

   “Thou need’st not fear a darker fate—
   Go forth with yonder throng, and wait.”




A SONG OF REPUBLICS


   Fair Freedom’s ship, too long adrift—
      Of every wind the sport—
   Now rigged and manned, her course well planned,
      Sails proudly out of port;
   And fluttering gaily from the mast
      This motto is unfurled,
   Let all men heed its truth who read:
      “Republics rule the World!”

   The universe is high as God!
      Good is the final goal;
   The world revolves and man evolves
      A purpose and a soul.
   No church can bind, no crown forbid
      Thought’s mighty upward course—
   Let kings give way before its sway,
      For God inspires its force.

   The hero of a vanished age
      Was one who bathed in gore;
   Who best could fight was noblest knight
      In savage days of yore;
   Now warrior chiefs are out of date,
      The times have changed.  To-day
   We call men great who arbitrate
      And keep war’s hounds at bay.

   The world no longer looks to priest
      Or prince to know its needs;
   Earth’s human throng has grown too strong
      To rule with courts and creeds.
   We want no kings but kings of toil—
      No crowns but crowns of deeds;
   Not royal birth but sterling worth
      Must mark the man who leads.

   Proud monarchies are out of step
      With modern thought to-day,
   For Brotherhood is understood,
      And thrones may pass away.
   Men dare to think.  Concerted thought
      Contains more power than swords:
   The force that binds united minds
      Defeats mere savage hordes.

   Man needs no arbitrary hand
      To keep him in control;
   He feels the power grow hour by hour
      Of his expanding soul:
   In God’s stupendous scheme of worlds
      He knows he has a place;
   He is no slave to cringe, and crave
      Some worthless monarch’s grace.

   As ocean billows undermine
      The haughty shores each hour,
   Time’s sea has brought its waves of thought
      To crumble thrones of power;
   And one by one shall kingdoms fall
      Like leaves before the blast,
   As man with man combines to plan
      Republics formed to last.

   Columbia baulked a tyrant king,
      And built upon a rock,
   In Freedom’s name, a shrine whose fame
      Outlived the century’s shock.
   Now France within our port has set
      Her symbol of re-birth;
   Her lifted hand tells sea and land
      Republics light the earth.

   One mighty church for all the world
      Would make men far more kind;
   One government would bring content
      To many a restless mind.
   Sail on, fair ship of Freedom, sail
      The wide sea’s breadth and length.
   ’Till worlds unite to make the might
      Of “One Republic’s” strength.




MEMORIAL DAY—1892


   The quiet graves of our country’s braves
      Through thirty Junes and Decembers
   Have solemnly lain under sun and rain,
      And yet the Nation remembers.

   The marching of feet and the flags on the street
      Told once again this morning,
   In the voice of the drum how the day had come
      For those lowly beds’ adorning.

   Then swiftly back on Time’s worn track
      His three decades seemed driven,
   And with startled eyes I saw arise,
      From graves by fancy riven,

   The Gray and Blue in a grand review.
      Oh! vast were the hosts they numbered,
   As they wheeled and swayed in a dress parade
      O’er the graves where they long had slumbered.

   The colours were not, as when they fought,
      Ranked one against the other,
   But a mingled hue of gray and blue,
      As brother marching with brother.

   And a blue flower lay on each coat of gray,
      Like forget-me-nots on a boulder;
   And the gray moss lace in its Southern grace
      Was knotted on each blue shoulder.

   The vision fled; but I think our dead,
      If they could come back with the living,
   Would clasp warm hands o’er hostile lands,
      Forgetting old wrongs and forgiving.

   ’Mong the blossoms of Spring that you gather and bring
      To graves that though lowly are royal,
   Let the blue flower prevail, though modest and pale,
      Since it speaks of the hue that was loyal.

   But tie each bouquet with a ribbon of gray
      And lay it on memory’s altar,
   For the dead who fought for the cause they thought
      Was right, and who did not falter.




WHEN BABY SOULS SAIL OUT


   When from our mortal vision
      Grown men and women go
   To sail strange fields Elysian
      And know what spirits know,
   I think of them as tourists,
      In some sun-gilded clime,
   ’Mong happy sights and dear delights
      We all shall find, in time.

   But when a child goes yonder
      And leaves its mother here,
   Its little feet must wander,
      It seems to me, in fear.
   What paths of Eden beauty,
      What scenes of peace and rest,
   Can bring content to one who went
      Forth from a mother’s breast?

   In palace gardens, lonely,
      A little child will roam
   And weep for pleasures only
      Found in its humble home.
   It is not won by splendour,
      Nor bought by costly toys;
   To hide from harm on mother’s arm
      Makes all its sum of joys.

   It must be when the baby
      Goes journeying off alone,
   Some angel (Mary, may be)
      Adopts it for her own.
   Yet when a child is taken
      Whose mother stays below,
   With weeping eyes, through Paradise,
      I seem to see it go.

   With troops of angels trying
      To drive away its fear,
   I seem to hear it crying,
      “I want my mamma here.”
   I do not court the fancy,
      It is not based on doubt,
   It is a thought that comes unsought
      When baby souls sail out.




TO ANOTHER WOMAN’S BABY


   I list your prattle, baby boy,
      And hear your pattering feet
   With feelings more of pain than joy
      And thoughts of bitter-sweet.

   While touching your soft hands in play
      Such passionate longings rise
   For my wee boy who strayed away
      So soon to Paradise.

   You win me with your infant art;
      But when our play is o’er,
   The empty cradle in my heart
      Seems lonelier than before.

   Sweet baby boy, you do not guess
      How oft mine eyes are dim,
   Or that my lingering caress
      Is sometimes meant for _him_.




DIAMONDS


   The tears of fallen women turned to ice
   By man’s cold pity for repentant vice.




RUBIES


   The crimson life-drops from a virgin heart
   Pierced to the core by Cupid’s fatal dart.




SAPPHIRES


   Lost rays of light that wandered off alone
      And down through space were hurled
   From that great sapphire sun beyond our own
      Pale, puny little world.




TURQUOISE


   A baby went to heaven while it slept,
      And, waking, missed its mother’s arms, and wept.
   Those angel tear-drops, falling earthward through
      God’s azure skies, into the turquoise grew.




REFORM


   The time has come when men with hearts and brains
   Must rise and take the misdirected reins
   Of government; too long left in the hands
   Of aliens and of lackeys.  He who stands
   And sees the mighty vehicle of State
   Hauled through the mire to some ignoble fate
   And makes not such bold protest as he can,
      Is no American,




A MINOR CHORD


   I heard a strain of music in the street—
      A wandering waif of sound.  And then straightway
         A nameless desolation filled the day.
   The great green earth that had been fair and sweet,
   Seemed but a tomb; the life I thought replete
      With joy, grew lonely for a vanished May.
      Forgotten sorrows resurrected lay
   Like bleaching skeletons about my feet.

   Above me stretched the silent, suffering sky,
      Dumb with vast anguish for departed suns
         That brutal Time to nothingness has hurled.
   The daylight was as sad as smiles that lie
      Upon the wistful, unkissed mouths of nuns,
         And I stood prisoned in an awful world.




DEATH’S PROTEST


   Why dost thou shrink from my approach, O Man?
   Why dost thou ever flee in fear, and cling
   To my false rival, Life?  I do but bring
   Thee rest and calm.  Then wherefore dost thou ban
   And curse me?  Since the forming of God’s plan
      I have not hurt or harmed a mortal thing,
      I have bestowed sweet balm for every sting,
   And peace eternal for earth’s stormy span.

   The wild mad prayers for comfort sent in vain
      To knock at the indifferent heart of Life,
         I, Death, have answered.  Knowest thou not ’tis he,
   My cruel rival, who sends all thy pain
      And wears the soul out in unending strife?
         Why dost thou hold to him, then, spurning me?




SEPTEMBER


   My life’s long radiant Summer halts at last,
   And lo! beside my path way I behold
   Pursuing Autumn glide: nor frost nor cold
   Has heralded her presence; but a vast
   Sweet calm that comes not till the year has passed
      Its fevered solstice, and a tinge of gold
      Subdues the vivid colouring of bold
   And passion-hued emotions.  I will cast

   My August days behind me with my May,
      Nor strive to drag them into Autumn’s place,
         Nor swear I hope when I do but remember.
   Now violet and rose have had their day,
      I’ll pluck the soberer asters with good grace
         And call September nothing but September.




WAIL OF AN OLD-TIMER


   Each new invention doubles our worries an’ our troubles,
      These scientific fellows are spoilin’ of our land;
   With motor, wire, an’ cable, now’-days we’re scarcely able
      To walk or ride in peace o’ mind, an’ ’tisn’t safe to stand.

   It fairly makes me crazy to see how tarnal lazy
      The risin’ generation grows—an’ science is to blame.
   With telephones for talkin’, an’ messengers for walkin’,
      Our young men sit an’ loaf an’ smoke, without a blush o’ shame.

   An’ then they wer’n’t contented until some one invented
      A sort o’ jerky tape-line clock, to help on wasteful ways.
   An’ that infernal ticker spends money fur ’em quicker
      Than any neighbourhood o’ men in good old bygone days.

   The risin’ generation is bent so on creation,
      Folks haven’t time to talk or sing or cry or even laugh.
   But if you take the notion to want some such emotion,
      They’ve got it all on tap fur you, right in the phonograph.

   But now a crazy creature has introduced the feature
      Of artificial weather, I think we’re nearly through.
   For when we once go strainin’ to keep it dry or rainin’
      To suit the general public, ’twill bust the world in two,




WAS, IS, AND YET-TO-BE


   Was, Is, and Yet-to-Be
   Were chatting over a cup of tea.

   In tarnished finery smelling of must,
   Was talked of people long turned to dust;

   Of titles and honours and high estate,
   All forgotten or out of date;

   Of wonderful feasts in the long ago,
   Of pride that perished with nothing to show.

   “I loathe the present,” said Was, with a groan;
   “I live in pleasures that I _have_ known.”

   The Yet-to-be, in a gown of gauze,
   Looked over the head of musty Was,

   And gazed far off into misty space
   With a wrapt expression upon her face.

   “Such wonderful pleasures are coming to me,
   Such glory, such honour,” said Yet-to-be.

   “No one dreamed, in the vast Has-Been,
   Of such successes as I shall win.

   “The past, the present—why, what are they?
   I live for the joy of a future day.”

   Then practical Is, in a fresh print dress,
   Spoke up with a laugh, “I must confess

   “I find to-day so pleasant,” she said,
   “I never look back, and seldom ahead.

   “Whatever has been, is a finished sum;
   Whatever will be—why, let it come.

   “To-day is mine.  And so, you see,
   I have the past and the yet-to-be;

   “For to-day is the future of yesterday,
   And the past of to-morrow.  I live while I may,

   “And I think the secret of pleasure is this.
   And this alone,” said practical Is.




MISTAKES


   God sent us here to make mistakes,
      To strive, to fail, to re-begin,
      To taste the tempting fruit of sin,
   And find what bitter food it makes,

   To miss the path, to go astray,
      To wander blindly in the night;
      But, searching, praying for the light,
   Until at last we find the way.

   And looking back along the past,
      We know we needed all the strain
      Of fear and doubt and strife and pain
   To make us value peace, at last.

   Who fails, finds later triumph sweet;
      Who stumbles once, walks then with care,
      And knows the place to cry “Beware”
   To other unaccustomed feet.

   Through strife the slumbering soul awakes,
      We learn on error’s troubled route
      The truths we could not prize without
   The sorrow of our sad mistakes.




DUAL


   You say that your nature is double; that life
      Seems more and more intricate, complex, and dual,
   Because in your bosom there wages the strife
      ’Twixt an angel of light and a beast that is cruel—
   An angel who whispers your spirit has wings,
   And a beast who would chain you to temporal things.

   I listen with interest to all you have told,
      And now let me give you my view of your trouble:
   You are to be envied, not pitied; I hold
      _That every strong nature is always made double_.
   The beast has his purpose; he need not be slain:
   He should serve the good angel in harness and chain.

   The body that never knows carnal desires,
      The heart that to passion is always a stranger,
   Is merely a furnace with unlighted fires;
      It sends forth no warmth while it threatens no danger.
   But who wants to shiver in cold safety there?
   _Touch flame to the fuel_! then watch it with care.

   Those wild, fierce emotions that trouble your soul
      Are sparks from the great source of passion and power;
   Throne reason above them, and give it control,
      And turn into blessing this dangerous dower.
   By lightnings unguided destruction is hurled,
   But chained and directed they gladden the world.




THE ALL-CREATIVE SPARK


   Pain can go guised as joy, dross pass for gold,
      Vulgarity can masquerade as wit,
   Or spite wear friendship’s garments; but I hold
      That passionate feeling has no counterfeit.
   Chief jewel from Jove’s crown ’twas sent men, lent
   For inspiration and for sacrament.

   Jove never could have made the Universe
      Had he not glowed with passion’s sacred fire;
   Though man oft turns the blessing to a curse,
      And burns himself on his own funeral pyre,
   Though scarred the soul be where its light burns bright,
   Yet where it is not, neither is there might.

   Yea, it was set in Jove’s resplendent crown
      When he created worlds; that done, why, hence,
   He cast the priceless, awful jewel down
      To be man’s punishment and recompense.
   And that is how he sees and hears our tears
   Unmoved and calm from the eternal spheres.

   But sometimes, since he parted with all passion,
      In trifling mood, to pass the time away,
   He has created men in that same fashion,
      And many women (jesting as gods may),
   Who have no souls to be inspired or fired,
   Mere sport of idle gods who have grown tired.

   And these poor puppets, gazing in the dark
      At their own shadows, think the world no higher;
   And when they see the all-creative spark
      In other souls, they straightway cry out, “Fire!”
   And shriek, and rave, till their dissent is spent,
   While listening gods laugh loud in merriment.




BE NOT CONTENT


   Be not content—contentment means inaction;
      The growing soul aches on its upward quest;
   Satiety is twin to satisfaction;
      All great achievements spring from life’s unrest.

   The tiny roots, deep in the dark mould hiding,
      Would never bless the earth with leaf and flower
   Were not an inborn restlessness abiding
      In seed and germ, to stir them with its power.

   Were man contented with his lot forever,
      He had not sought strange seas with sails unfurled,
   And the vast wonder of our shores had never
      Dawned on the gaze of an admiring world.

   Prize what is yours, but be not quite contented.
      There is a healthful restlessness of soul
   By which a mighty purpose is augmented
      In urging men to reach a higher goal.

   So when the restless impulse rises, driving
      Your calm content before it, do not grieve;
   It is the upward reaching of the spirit
      Of the God in you to achieve—achieve.




ACTION


   For ever stars are winging
      Their swift and endless race;
   For ever suns are swinging
      Their mighty globes through space.
   Since by his law required
   To join God’s spheres inspired,
   The earth has never tired,
      But whirled and whirled and whirled.
   For ever streams are flowing,
   For ever seeds are growing,
   Alway is Nature showing
      That Action rules the world.

   And since by God requested
      To _be_, the glorious light
   Has never paused or rested,
      But travelled day and night.
   Yet pigmy man, unseeing
   The purpose of his being,
   Demands escape and freeing
      From universal force.
   But law is law for ever,
   And like a mighty lever
   It thrusts him tow’rd endeavour,
      And speeds him on his course.




TWO ROSES


   A humble wild-rose, pink and slender,
      Was plucked and placed in a bright bouquet,
   Beside a Jacqueminot’s royal splendour,
      And both in my lady’s boudoir lay.

   Said the haughty bud, in a tone of scorning,
      “I wonder why you are called a rose?
   Your leaves will fade in a single morning;
      No blood of mine in your pale cheek glows.

   “Your coarse green stalk shows dust of the highway,
      You have no depths of fragrant bloom;
   And what could you learn in a rustic byway
      To fit you to lie in my lady’s room?

   “If called to adorn her warm, white bosom,
      What have you to offer for such a place,
   Beside my fragrant and splendid blossom,
      Ripe with colour and rich with grace?”

   Said the sweet wild-rose, “Despite your dower
      Of finer breeding and deeper hue,
   Despite your beauty, fair, high-bred flower,
      It is I who should lie on her breast, not you.

   “For small account is your hot-house glory
      Beside the knowledge that came to me
   When I heard by the wayside love’s old story
      And felt the kiss of the amorous bee.”




SATIETY


   To yearn for what we have not had, to sit
      With hungry eyes glued on the Future’s gate,
   Why, that is heaven compared to having it
      With all the power gone to appreciate.

   Better to wait and yearn, and still to wait,
      And die at last with unappeased desire,
   Than live to be the jest of such a fate,
      For that is my conception of hell-fire.




A SOLAR ECLIPSE


   In that great journey of the stars through space
      About the mighty, all-directing Sun,
   The pallid, faithful Moon has been the one
   Companion of the Earth.  Her tender face,
   Pale with the swift, keen purpose of that race
      Which at Time’s natal hour was first begun,
      Shines ever on her lover as they run
   And lights his orbit with her silvery smile.

   Sometimes such passionate love doth in her rise,
      Down from her beaten path she softly slips,
   And with her mantle veils the Sun’s bold eyes,
      Then in the gloaming finds her lover’s lips.
   While far and near the men our world call wise
      See only that the Sun is in eclipse.




A SUGGESTION
To C. A. D.


   Let the wild red-rose bloom.  Though not to thee
      So delicately perfect as the white
      And unwed lily drooping in the light,
   Though she has known the kisses of the bee
      And tells her amorous tale to passers-by
   In perfumed whispers and with untaught grace,
   Still let the red-rose bloom in her own place;
      She could not be the lily should she try.

   Why to the wondrous nightingale cry hush
      Or bid her cease her wild heart-breaking lay,
      And tune her voice to imitate the way
   The whip-poor-will makes music, or the thrush?
      All airs of sorrow to one theme belong,
   And passion is not copyrighted yet.
   Each heart writes its own music.  Why not let
      The nightingale unchided sing her song?




THE DEPTHS


   Not only sun-kissed heights are fair.  Below
   The cold, dark billows of the frowning deep
   Do lovely blossoms of the ocean sleep,
   Rocked gently by the waters to and fro.
   The coral beds with magic colours glow,
      And priceless pearl-encrusted molluscs heap
      The glittering rocks where shining atoms leap
   Like living broken rainbows.

         Even so
   We find the sea of sorrow.  Black as night
      The sullen surface meets our frightened gaze,
         As down we sink to darkness and despair.
   But at the depths—such beauty! such delight!
      Such flowers as never grew in pleasure’s ways!
         Ah! not alone are sun-kissed summits fair.




LIFE’S OPERA


   Like an opera-house is the world, I ween,
   Where the passionate lover of music is seen
      In the balcony near the roof:
   While the very best seat in the first stage-box
   Is filled by the person who laughs and talks
      Through the harmony’s warp and woof.




THE SALT SEA-WIND


   When Venus, mother and maker of blisses,
      Rose out of the billows, large-limbed, and fair,
   She stood on the sands and blew sweet kisses
      To the salt sea-wind as she dried her hair.

   And the salt sea-wind was the first to caress her
      To praise her beauty and call her sweet,
   The first of the whole wide world to possess her,
      She, that creature of light and heat.

   Though the sea is old with its sorrows and angers,
      And the world has forgotten why love was born,
   Yet the salt sea-wind is full of the languors
      That Venus taught on her natal morn.

   And now whoever dwells there by the ocean,
      And feels the wind on his hair and face,
   Is stirred by a subtle and keen emotion,
      The lingering spell of that first embrace.




NEW YEAR


   New Year, I look straight in your eyes—
      Our ways and our interests blend;
   You may be a foe in disguise,
      But I shall believe you a friend.
   We get what we give in our measure,
   We cannot give pain and get pleasure;
   I give you good will and good cheer,
   And you must return it, New Year.

   We get what we give in this life,
      Though often the giver indeed
   Waits long upon doubting and strife
      Ere proving the truth of my creed.
   But somewhere, some way, and for ever
   Reward is the meed of endeavour;
   And if I am really worth while,
   New Year, you will give me your smile.

   You hide in your mystical hand
      No “luck” that I cannot control,
   If I trust my own courage and stand
      On the Infinite strength of my soul.
   Man holds in his brain and his spirit
   A power that is God-like, or near it,
   And he who has measured his force
   Can govern events and their course.

   You come with a crown on your brow,
      New Year, without blemish or spot;
   Yet you, and not I, sir, must bow,
      For time is the servant of thought
   Whatever you bring me of trouble
   Shall turn into good, and then double,
   If my spirit looks up without fear
   To the Source that you came from, New Year.




CONCENTRATION


   The age is too diffusive.  Time and Force
      Are frittered out and bring no satisfaction.
      The way seems lost to straight determined action.
      Like shooting stars that zig-zag from their course
      We wander from our orbit’s pathway; spoil
   The rôle we’re fitted for, to fail in twenty.
   Bring empty measures, that were shaped for plenty,
      At last as guerdon for a life of toil.
   There’s lack of greatness in this generation
      Because no more man centres on one thought.
      We know this truth, and yet we heed it not:
   The secret of success is Concentration.




THOUGHTS


   Thoughts do not need the wings of words
      To fly to any goal.
   Like subtle lightnings, not like birds,
      They speed from soul to soul.

   Hide in your heart a bitter thought—
      Still it has power to blight;
   Think Love—although you speak it not
      It gives the world more light.




LUCK


   Luck is the tuning of our inmost thought
      To chord with God’s great plan.
         That done, ah! know,
   Thy silent wishes to results shall grow,
   And day by day shall miracles be wrought.
   Once let thy being selflessly be brought
      To chime with universal good, and lo!
      What music from the spheres shall through thee flow!
   What benefits shall come to thee unsought!

   Shut out the noise of traffic!  Rise above
      The body’s clamour!  With the soul’s fine ear
         Attune thyself to harmonies divine—
   All, all are written in the key of Love.
      Keep to the score, and thou hast naught to fear;
         Achievements yet undreamed of shall be thine.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS OF SENTIMENT***


******* This file should be named 6617-0.txt or 6617-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/6/1/6617



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
