The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pausanias, the Spartan, by Lord Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Pausanias, the Spartan
       The Haunted and the Haunters, An Unfinished Historical Romance

Author: Lord Lytton

Release Date: July, 2005 [EBook #8573]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on August 16, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO Latin-1

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUSANIAS, THE SPARTAN ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Marc D'Hooghe and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.




PAUSANIAS, THE SPARTAN.

THE HAUNTED AND THE HAUNTERS.

An Unfinished Historical Romance

BY

THE LATE LORD LYTTON

EDITED BY HIS SON




Dedication


TO

THE REV. BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, D.D.

CANON OF ELY,

AND REGIUS PROFESSOR OF GREEK IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY DEAR DR. KENNEDY,

Revised by your helpful hand, and corrected by your accurate
scholarship, to whom may these pages be so fitly inscribed as to that
one of their author's earliest and most honoured friends,[1] whose
generous assistance has enabled me to place them before the public in
their present form?

It is fully fifteen, if not twenty, years since my father commenced
the composition of an historical romance on the subject of Pausanias,
the Spartan Regent. Circumstances, which need not here be recorded,
compelled him to lay aside the work thus begun. But the subject
continued to haunt his imagination and occupy his thoughts. He detected
in it singular opportunities for effective exercise of the gifts most
peculiar to his genius; and repeatedly, in the intervals of other
literary labour, he returned to the task which, though again and again
interrupted, was never abandoned. To that rare combination of the
imaginative and practical faculties which characterized my father's
intellect, and received from his life such varied illustration, the
story of Pausanias, indeed, briefly as it is told by Thucydides and
Plutarch, addressed itself with singular force. The vast conspiracy of
the Spartan Regent, had it been successful, would have changed the
whole course of Grecian history. To any student of political phenomena,
but more especially to one who, during the greater part of his life,
had been personally engaged in active politics, the story of such a
conspiracy could not fail to be attractive. To the student of human
nature the character of Pausanias himself offers sources of the
deepest interest; and, in the strange career and tragic fate of the
great conspirator, an imagination fascinated by the supernatural must
have recognized remarkable elements of awe and terror. A few months
previous to his death, I asked my father whether he had abandoned all
intention of finishing his romance of "Pausanias." He replied, "On the
contrary, I am finishing it now," and entered, with great animation,
into a discussion of the subject and its capabilities. This reply to my
inquiry surprised and impressed me: for, as you are aware, my father was
then engaged in the simultaneous composition of two other and very
different works, "Kenelm Chillingly" and the "Parisians." It was the
last time he ever spoke to me about Pausanias; but from what he then
said of it I derived an impression that the book was all but completed,
and needing only a few finishing touches to be ready for publication at
no distant date.

This impression was confirmed, subsequent to my father's death, by a
letter of instructions about his posthumous papers which accompanied
his will. In that letter, dated 1856, special allusion is made to
Pausanias as a work already far advanced towards its conclusion.

You, to whom, in your kind and careful revision of it, this unfinished
work has suggested many questions which, alas, I cannot answer, as
to the probable conduct and fate of its fictitious characters, will
readily understand my reluctance to surrender an impression seemingly
so well justified. I did not indeed cease to cherish it, until
reiterated and exhaustive search had failed to recover from the
"wallet" wherein Time "puts alms for oblivion," more than those few
imperfect fragments which, by your valued help, are here arranged in
such order as to carry on the narrative of Pausanias, with no solution
of continuity, to the middle of the second volume.

There the manuscript breaks off. Was it ever continued further? I know
not. Many circumstances induce me to believe that the conception had
long been carefully completed in the mind of its author; but he has
left behind him only a very meagre and imperfect indication of the
course which, beyond the point where it is broken, his narrative was
intended to follow. In presence of this fact I have had to choose
between the total suppression of the fragment, and the publication
of it in its present form. My choice has not been made without
hesitation; but I trust that, from many points of view, the following
pages will be found to justify it.

Judiciously (as I cannot but think) for the purposes of his fiction,
my father has taken up the story of Pausanias at a period subsequent
to the battle of Plataea; when the Spartan Regent, as Admiral of the
United Greek Fleet in the waters of Byzantium, was at the summit of
his power and reputation. Mr. Grote, in his great work, expresses the
opinion (which certainly cannot be disputed by unbiassed readers of
Thucydides) that the victory of Plataea was not attributable to any
remarkable abilities on the part of Pausanias. But Mr. Grote fairly
recognizes as quite exceptional the fame and authority accorded to
Pausanias, after the battle, by all the Hellenic States; the influence
which his name commanded, and the awe which his character inspired.
Not to the mere fact of his birth as an Heracleid, not to the lucky
accident (if such it were) of his success at Plataea, and certainly
not to his undisputed (but surely by no means uncommon) physical
courage, is it possible to attribute the peculiar position which
this remarkable man so long occupied in the estimation of his
contemporaries. For the little that we know about Pausanias we are
mainly dependent upon Athenian writers, who must have been strongly
prejudiced against him. Mr. Grote, adopting (as any modern historian
needs must do) the narrative so handed down to him, never once pauses
to question its estimate of the character of a man who was at one time
the glory, and at another the terror, of all Greece. Yet in comparing
the summary proceedings taken against Leotychides with the extreme,
and seemingly pusillanimous, deference paid to Pausanias by the Ephors
long after they possessed the most alarming proofs of his treason,
Mr. Grote observes, without attempting to account for the fact, that
Pausanias, though only Regent, was far more powerful than any Spartan
King. Why so powerful? Obviously, because he possessed uncommon force
of character; a force of character strikingly attested by every
known incident of his career; and which, when concentrated upon the
conception and execution of vast designs, (even if those designs be
criminal), must be recognized as the special attribute of genius.
Thucydides, Plutarch, Diodorus, Grote, all these writers ascribe
solely to the administrative incapacity of Pausanias that offensive
arrogance which characterized his command at Byzantium, and apparently
cost Sparta the loss of her maritime hegemony. But here is precisely
one of those problems in public policy and personal conduct which the
historian bequeathes to the imaginative writer, and which needs, for
its solution, a profound knowledge rather of human nature than of
books. For dealing with such a problem, my father, in addition to the
intuitive penetration of character and motive which is common to every
great romance writer, certainly possessed two qualifications special
to himself: the habit of dealing _practically_ with political
questions, and experience in the active management of men. His
explanation of the policy of Pausanias at Byzantium, if it be not (as
I think it is) the right one, is at least the only one yet offered. I
venture to think that, historically, it merits attention; as, from the
imaginative point of view, it is undoubtedly felicitous. By elevating
our estimate of Pausanias as a statesman, it increases our interest in
him as a man.

The Author of "Pausanias" does not merely tell us that his hero, when
in conference with the Spartan commissioners, displayed "great natural
powers which, rightly trained, might have made him not less renowned
in council than in war;" but he gives us, though briefly, the
arguments used by Pausanias. He presents to us the image, always
interesting, of a man who grasps firmly the clear conception of a
definite but difficult policy, for success in which he is dependent on
the conscious or involuntary cooperation of men impenetrable to that
conception, and possessed of a collective authority even greater than
his own. To retain Sparta temporarily at the head of Greece was an
ambition quite consistent with the more criminal designs of Pausanias;
and his whole conduct at Byzantium is rendered more intelligible than
it appears in history, when he points out that "for Sparta to maintain
her ascendancy two things are needful: first, to continue the war
by land, secondly, to disgust the Ionians with their sojourn at
Byzantium, to send them with their ships back to their own havens, and
so leave Hellas under the sole guardianship of the Spartans and their
Peloponnesian allies." And who has not learned, in a later school, the
wisdom of the Spartan commissioners? Do not their utterances sound
familiar to us? "Increase of dominion is waste of life and treasure.
Sparta is content to hold her own. What care we, who leads the Greeks
into blows? The fewer blows the better. Brave men fight if they must:
wise men never fight if they can help it." Of this scene and some
others in the first volume of the present fragment (notably the scene
in which the Regent confronts the allied chiefs, and defends himself
against the charge of connivance at the escape of the Persian
prisoners), I should have been tempted to say that they could not have
been written without personal experience of political life; if
the interview between Wallenstein and the Swedish ambassadors in
Schiller's great trilogy did not recur to my recollection as I write.
The language of the ambassadors in that interview is a perfect manual
of practical diplomacy; and yet in practical diplomacy Schiller had
no personal experience. There are, indeed, no limits to the creative
power of genius. But it is perhaps the practical politician who will
be most interested by the chapters in which Pausanias explains his
policy, or defends his position.

In publishing a romance which its author has left unfinished, I may
perhaps be allowed to indicate briefly what I believe to have been
the general scope of its design, and the probable progress of its
narrative.

The "domestic interest" of that narrative is supplied by the story of
Cleonice: a story which, briefly told by Plutarch, suggests one of
the most tragic situations it is possible to conceive. The pathos and
terror of this dark weird episode in a life which history herself
invests with all the character of romance, long haunted the
imagination of Byron; and elicited from Goethe one of the most
whimsical illustrations of the astonishing absurdity into which
criticism sometimes tumbles, when it "o'erleaps itself and falls o'
the other---."

Writing of Manfred and its author, he says, "There are, properly
speaking, two females whose phantoms for ever haunt him; and which,
in this piece also, perform principal parts. One under the name of
Astarte, the other without form or actual presence, and merely a
voice. Of the horrid occurrence which took place with the former, the
following is related:--When a bold and enterprising young man, he won
the affections of a Florentine lady. Her husband discovered the amour,
and murdered his wife. But the murderer was the same night found dead
in the street, and there was no one to whom any suspicion could be
attached. Lord Byron removed from Florence, and _these spirits haunted
him all his life after_. This romantic incident is rendered highly
probable by innumerable allusions to it in his poems. As, for instance,
when turning his sad contemplations inwards, he applies to himself the
fatal history of the King of Sparta. It is as follows: Pausanias, a
Lacedaemonian General, acquires glory by the important victory at
Plataea; but afterwards forfeits the confidence of his countrymen by
his arrogance, obstinacy, and secret intrigues with the common enemy.
This man draws upon himself the heavy guilt of innocent blood, which
attends him to his end. For, while commanding the fleet of the allied
Greeks in the Black Sea, he is inflamed with a violent passion for a
Byzantine maiden. After long resistance, he at length obtains her from
her parents; and she is to be delivered up to him at night. She modestly
desires the servant to put out the lamp, and, while groping her way in
the dark, she overturns it. Pausanias is awakened from his sleep;
apprehensive of an attack from murderers he seizes his sword, and
destroys his mistress. The horrid sight never leaves him. Her shade
pursues him unceasingly; and in vain he implores aid of the gods and the
exorcising priests. That poet must have a lacerated heart who selects
such a scene from antiquity, appropriates it to himself, and burdens his
tragic image with it."[2]

It is extremely characteristic of Byron, that, instead of resenting
this charge of murder, he was so pleased by the criticism in which
it occurs that he afterwards dedicated "The Deformed Transformed" to
Goethe. Mr. Grote repeats the story above alluded to, with all the
sanction of his grave authority, and even mentions the name of the
young lady; apparently for the sake of adding a few black strokes to
the character of Pausanias. But the supernatural part of the legend
was, of course, beneath the notice of a nineteenth-century critic; and
he passes it by. This part of the story is, however, essential to
the psychological interest of it. For whether it be that Pausanias
supposed himself, or that contemporary gossips supposed him, to be
haunted by the phantom of the woman he had loved and slain, the fact,
in either case, affords a lurid glimpse into the inner life of
the man;--just as, although Goethe's murder-story about Byron is
ludicrously untrue, yet the fact that such a story was circulated,
and could be seriously repeated by such a man as Goethe without being
resented by Byron himself, offers significant illustration both of
what Byron was, and of what he appeared to his contemporaries. Grote
also assigns the death of Cleonice to that period in the life of
Pausanias when he was in the command of the allies at Byzantium; and
refers to it as one of the numerous outrages whereby Pausanias abused
and disgraced the authority confided to him. Plutarch, however, who
tells the story in greater detail, distinctly fixes the date of its
catastrophe subsequent to the return of the Regent to Byzantium, as a
solitary volunteer, in the trireme of Hermione. The following is his
account of the affair:

"It is related that Pausanias, when at Byzantium, sought, with
criminal purpose, the love of a young lady of good family, named
Cleonice. The parents yielding to fear, or necessity, suffered him to
carry away their daughter. Before entering his chamber, she requested
that the light might be extinguished; and in darkness and silence she
approached the couch of Pausanias, who was already asleep. In so doing
she accidentally upset the lamp. Pausanias, suddenly aroused from
slumber, and supposing that some enemy was about to assassinate him,
seized his sword, which lay by his bedside, and with it struck the
maiden to the ground. She died of her wound; and from that moment
repose was banished from the life of Pausanias. A spectre appeared to
him every night in his sleep; and repeated to him in reproachful tones
this hexameter verse,_Whither I wait thee march, and receive the doom
thou deservest. Sooner or later, but ever, to man crime bringeth
disaster.'_

The allies, scandalized by this misdeed, concerted with Cimon, and
besieged Pausanias in Byzantium. But he succeeded in escaping,
Continually troubled by the phantom, he took refuge, it is said, at
Heraclea, in that temple where the souls of the dead are evoked. He
appealed to Cleonice and conjured her to mitigate his torment. She
appeared to him, and told him that on his return to Sparta he would
attain the end of his sufferings; indicating, as it would seem, by
these enigmatic words, the death which there awaited him. "This"
(adds Plutarch) "is a story told by most of the historians."[3]

I feel no doubt that this version of the story, or at least the
general outline of it, would have been followed by the romance had my
father lived to complete it. Some modification of its details would
doubtless have been necessary for the purposes of fiction. But that
the Cleonice of the novel is destined to die by the hand of her lover,
is clearly indicated. To me it seems that considerable skill and
judgment are shown in the pains taken, at the very opening of the book,
to prepare the mind of the reader for an incident which would have been
intolerably painful, and must have prematurely ended the whole narrative
interest, had the character of Cleonice been drawn otherwise than as we
find it in this first portion of the book. From the outset she appears
before us under the shadow of a tragic fatality. Of that fatality she
is herself intuitively conscious: and with it her whole being is in
harmony. No sooner do we recognise her real character than we perceive
that, for such a character, there can be no fit or satisfactory issue
from the difficulties of her position, in any conceivable combination
of earthly circumstances. But she is not of the earth earthly. Her
thoughts already habitually hover on the dim frontier of some vague
spiritual region in which her love seeks refuge from the hopeless
realities of her life; and, recognising this betimes, we are prepared
to see above the hand of her ill-fated lover, when it strikes her down
in the dark, the merciful and releasing hand of her natural destiny.

But, assuming the author to have adopted Plutarch's chronology,
and deferred the death of Cleonice till the return of Pausanias to
Byzantium (the latest date to which he could possibly have deferred
it), this catastrophe must still have occurred somewhere in the
course, or at the close, of his second volume. There would, in that
case, have still remained about nine years (and those the most
eventful) of his hero's career to be narrated. The premature removal
of the heroine from the narrative, so early in the course of it,
would therefore, at first sight, appear to be a serious defect in the
conception of this romance. Here it is, however, that the credulous
gossip of the old biographer comes to the rescue of the modern artist.
I apprehend that the Cleonice of the novel would, after her death,
have been still sensibly present to the reader's imagination
throughout the rest of the romance. She would then have moved through
it like a fate, reappearing in the most solemn moments of the story,
and at all times apparent, even when unseen, in her visible influence
upon the fierce and passionate character, the sombre and turbulent
career, of her guilty lover. In short, we may fairly suppose that,
in all the closing scenes of the tragedy, Cleonice would have still
figured and acted as one of those supernatural agencies which my
father, following the example of his great predecessor, Scott, did not
scruple to introduce into the composition of historical romance.[4]

Without the explanation here suggested, those metaphysical
conversations between Cleonice, Alcman, and Pausanias, which occupy
the opening chapters of Book II., might be deemed superfluous. But, in
fact, they are essential to the preparation of the catastrophe; and
that catastrophe, if reached, would undoubtedly have revealed to any
reflective reader their important connection with the narrative which
they now appear to retard somewhat unduly.

Quite apart from the unfinished manuscript of this story of Pausanias,
and in another portion of my father's papers which have no reference
to this story, I have discovered the following, undated, memorandum of
the destined contents of the second and third volumes of the work.


PAUSANIAS.

VOL. II.

Lysander--Sparta--Ephors--Decision to recall Pausanias.

Pausanias with Pharnabazes--On the point of success--Xerxes'
daughter--Interview with Cleonice--Recalled.

Sparta--Alcman with his family.

Cleonice--Antagoras--Yields to suit of marriage.

Pausanias suddenly reappears, as a volunteer--Scenes.


VOL. III.

Pausanias removes Cleonice, &c.--Conspiracy against him--Up to
Cleonice's death.

His expulsion from Byzantium---His despair--His journey into
Thrace--Scythians, &c.

Heraclea--Ghost.

His return--to Colonae.

Antagoras resolved on revenge--Communicates with Sparta.

The * * *--Conference with Alcman--Pausanias depends on Helots, and
money.

His return--to death.


This is the only indication I can find of the intended conclusion of
the story. Meagre though it be, however, it sufficiently suggests the
manner in which the author of the romance intended to deal with the
circumstances of Cleonice's death as related by Plutarch. With her
forcible removal by Pausanias, or her willing flight with him from the
house of her father, it would probably have been difficult to reconcile
the general sentiment of the romance, in connection with any
circumstances less conceivable than those which are indicated in the
memorandum. But in such circumstances the step taken by Pausanias migh
 have had no worse motive than the rescue of the woman who loved him
from forced union with another; and Cleonice's assent to that step might
have been quite compatible with the purity and heroism of her character.
In this manner, moreover, a strong motive is prepared for that sentiment
of revenge on the part of Antagoras whereby the dramatic interest of the
story might be greatly heightened in the subsequent chapters. The
intended introduction of the supernatural element is also clearly
indicated. But apart from this, fine opportunities for psychological
analysis would doubtless have occurred in tracing the gradual deterio-
ration of such a character as that of Pausanias when, deprived of the
guardian influence of a hope passionate but not impure, its craving for
fierce excitement must have been stimulated by remorseful memories and
impotent despairs. Indeed, the imperfect manuscript now printed, contains
only the exposition of a tragedy. All the most striking effects, all the
strongest dramatic situations, have been reserved for the pages of the
manuscript which, alas, are either lost or unwritten.

Who can doubt, for instance, how effectually in the closing scenes of
this tragedy the grim image of Alithea might have assumed the place
assigned to it by history? All that we now see is the preparation made
for its effective presentation in the foreground of such later scenes,
by the chapter in the second volume describing the meeting between
Lysander and the stern mother of his Spartan chief. In Lysander himself,
moreover, we have the germ of a singularly dramatic situation. How would
Lysander act in the final struggle which his character and fate are
already preparing for him, between patriotism and friendship, his
fidelity to Pausanias, and his devotion to Sparta? Is Lysander's father
intended for that Ephor, who, in the last moment, made the sign that
warned Pausanias to take refuge in the temple which became his living
tomb? Probably. Would Themistocles, who was so seriously compromised in
the conspiracy of Pausanias, have appearedand played a part in those
scenes on which the curtain must remain unlifted? Possibly. Is Alcman the
helot who revealed, to the Ephors, the gigantic plots of his master just
when those plots were on the eve of execution? There is much in the
relations between Pausanias and the Mothon, as they are described in the
opening chapters of the romance, which favours, and indeed renders almost
irresistible, such a supposition. But then, on the other hand, what genius
on the part of the author could reconcile us to the perpetration by his
hero of a crime so mean, so cowardly, as that personal perfidy to which
history ascribes the revelation of the Regent's far more excusable
treasons, and their terrible punishment?

These questions must remain unanswered. The magician can wave his wand
no more. The circle is broken, the spells are scattered, the secret
lost. The images which he evoked, and which he alone could animate,
remain before us incomplete, semi-articulate, unable to satisfy the
curiosity they inspire. A group of fragments, in many places broken,
you have helped me to restore. With what reverent and kindly care,
with what disciplined judgment and felicitous suggestion, you have
accomplished the difficult task so generously undertaken, let me here
most gratefully attest. Beneath the sculptor's name, allow me to
inscribe upon the pedestal your own; and accept this sincere assurance
of the inherited esteem and personal regard with which I am,

My dear Dr. Kennedy,

Your obliged and faithful

LYTTON.

GINTRA, _5 July, 1875_.


Notes:

[1] The late Lord Lytton, in his unpublished autobiographical memoirs,
describing his contemporaries at Cambridge, speaks of Dr. Kennedy as
"a young giant of learning."--L.

[2] Moore's "Life and Letters of Lord Byron," p. 723.

[3] Plutarch, "Life of Cimon."

[4] "Harold."



PAUSANIAS, THE SPARTAN




BOOK I.




CHAPTER I.


On one of the quays which bordered the unrivalled harbour of
Byzantium, more than twenty-three centuries before the date at which
this narrative is begun, stood two Athenians. In the waters of the
haven rode the vessels of the Grecian Fleet. So deep was the basin, in
which the tides are scarcely felt,[5] that the prows of some of the
ships touched the quays, and the setting sun glittered upon the smooth
and waxen surfaces of the prows rich with diversified colours and
wrought gilding. To the extreme right of the fleet, and nearly
opposite the place upon which the Athenians stood, was a vessel still
more profusely ornamented than the rest. On the prow were elaborately
carved the heads of the twin deities of the Laconian mariner, Castor
and Pollux; in the centre of the deck was a wooden edifice or pavilion
having a gilded roof and shaded by purple awnings, an imitation of the
luxurious galleys of the Barbarian; while the parasemon, or flag, as
it idly waved in the faint breeze of the gentle evening, exhibited the
terrible serpent, which, if it was the fabulous type of demigods and
heroes, might also be regarded as an emblem of the wily but stern
policy of the Spartan State. Such was the galley of the commander of
the armament, which (after the reduction of Cyprus) had but lately
wrested from the yoke of Persia that link between her European and
Asiatic domains, that key of the Bosporus--"the Golden Horn" of
Byzantium.[6]

High above all other Greeks (Themistocles alone excepted) soared the
fame of that renowned chief, Pausanias, Regent of Sparta and General
of the allied troops at the victorious battle-field of Plataea. The
spot on which the Athenians stood was lonely and now unoccupied, save
by themselves and the sentries stationed at some distance on either
hand. The larger proportion of the crews in the various vessels were
on shore; but on the decks idly reclined small groups of sailors, and
the murmur of their voices stole, indistinguishably blended, upon the
translucent air. Behind rose, one above the other, the Seven Hills, on
which long afterwards the Emperor Constantine built a second Rome; and
over these heights, even then, buildings were scattered of various
forms and dates, here the pillared temples of the Greek colonists,
to whom Byzantium owed its origin, there the light roofs and painted
domes which the Eastern conquerors had introduced.

One of the Athenians was a man in the meridian of manhood, of a calm,
sedate, but somewhat haughty aspect; the other was in the full bloom
of youth, of lofty stature, and with a certain majesty of bearing;
down his shoulders flowed a profusion of long curled hair, divided in
the centre of the forehead, and connected with golden clasps, in which
was wrought the emblem of the Athenian nobles--the Grasshopper--a
fashion not yet obsolete, as it had become in the days of Thucydides.
Still, to an observer, there was something heavy in the ordinary
expression of the handsome countenance. His dress differed from the
earlier fashion of the Ionians;[7] it dispensed with those loose linen
garments which had something of effeminacy in their folds, and was
confined to the simple and statue-like grace that characterised the
Dorian garb. Yet the clasp that fastened the chlamys upon the right
shoulder, leaving the arm free, was of pure gold and exquisite
workmanship, and the materials of the simple vesture were of a quality
that betokened wealth and rank in the wearer.

"Yes, Cimon," said the elder of the Athenians, "yonder galley itself
affords sufficient testimony of the change that has come over the
haughty Spartan. It is difficult, indeed, to recognize in this
luxurious satrap, who affects the dress, the manners, the very
insolence of the Barbarian, that Pausanias who, after the glorious day
of Plataea, ordered the slaves to prepare in the tent of Mardonius
such a banquet as would have been served to the Persian, while his own
Spartan broth and bread were set beside it, in order that he might
utter to the chiefs of Greece that noble pleasantry, 'Behold the
folly of the Persians, who forsook such splendour to plunder such
poverty.'"[8]

"Shame upon his degeneracy, and thrice shame!" said the young Cimon,
sternly. "I love the Spartans so well, that I blush for whatever
degrades them. And all Sparta is dwarfed by the effeminacy of her
chief."

"Softly, Cimon," said Aristides, with a sober smile. "Whatever
surprise we may feel at the corruption of Pausanias, he is not one who
will allow us to feel contempt. Through all the voluptuous softness
acquired by intercourse with these Barbarians, the strong nature of
the descendant of the demigod still breaks forth. Even at the distaff
I recognize Alcides, whether for evil or for good. Pausanias is one on
whom our most anxious gaze must be duly bent. But in this change of
his I rejoice; the gods are at work for Athens. See you not that,
day after day, while Pausanias disgusts the allies with the Spartans
themselves, he throws them more and more into the arms of Athens? Let
his madness go on, and ere long the violet-crowned city will become
the queen of the seas."

"Such was my own hope," said Cimon, his face assuming a new
expression, brightened with all the intelligence of ambition and
pride; "but I did not dare own it to myself till you spoke. Several
officers of Ionia and the Isles have already openly and loudly
proclaimed to me their wish to exchange the Spartan ascendancy for the
Athenian."

"And with all your love for Sparta," said Aristides, looking
steadfastly and searchingly at his comrade, "you would not then
hesitate to rob her of a glory which you might bestow on your own
Athens?"

"Ah, am I not Athenian?" answered Cimon, with a deep passion in his
voice. "Though my great father perished a victim to the injustice of
a faction--though he who had saved Athens from the Mede died in the
Athenian dungeon--still, fatherless, I see in Athens but a mother, and
if her voice sounded harshly in my boyish years, in manhood I have
feasted on her smiles. Yes, I honour Sparta, but I love Athens. You
have my answer."

"You speak well," said Aristides, with warmth; "you are worthy of the
destinies for which I foresee that the son of Miltiades is reserved.
Be wary, be cautious; above all, be smooth, and blend with men of
every state and grade. I would wish that the allies themselves should
draw the contrast between the insolence of the Spartan chief and the
courtesy of the Athenians. What said you to the Ionian officers?"

"I said that Athens held there was no difference between to command
and to obey, except so far as was best for the interests of Greece;
that--as on the field of Plataea, when the Tegeans asserted precedence
over the Athenians, we, the Athenian army, at once exclaimed, through
your voice, Aristides, 'We come here to fight the Barbarian, not to
dispute amongst ourselves; place us where you will'[9]:--even so now,
while the allies give the command to Sparta, Sparta we will obey. But
if we were thought by the Grecian States the fittest leaders, our
answer would be the same that we gave at Plataea, 'Not we, but Greece
be consulted: place us where you will!'"

"O wise Cimon!" exclaimed Aristides, "I have no caution to bestow on
you. You do by intuition that which I attempt by experience. But hark!
What music sounds in the distance? the airs that Lydia borrowed from
the East?"

"And for which," said Cimon, sarcastically, "Pausanias hath abandoned
the Dorian flute."

Soft, airy, and voluptuous were indeed the sounds which now, from the
streets leading upwards from the quay, floated along the delicious
air. The sailors rose, listening and eager, from the decks; there was
once more bustle, life, and animation on board the fleet. From several
of the vessels the trumpets woke a sonorous signal-note. In a few
minutes the quays, before so deserted, swarmed with the Grecian
mariners, who emerged hastily, whether from various houses in the
haven, or from the encampment which stretched along it, and hurried
to their respective ships. On board the galley of Pausanias there was
more especial animation; not only mariners, but slaves, evidently
from the Eastern markets, were seen, jostling each other, and heard
talking, quick and loud, in foreign tongues. Rich carpets were
unfurled and laid across the deck, while trembling and hasty hands
smoothed into yet more graceful folds the curtains that shaded the
gay pavilion in the centre. The Athenians looked on, the one with
thoughtful composure, the other with a bitter smile, while these
preparations announced the unexpected, and not undreaded, approach of
the great Pausanias.

"Ho, noble Cimon!" cried a young man who, hurrying towards one of the
vessels, caught sight of the Athenians and paused. "You are the very
person whom I most desired to see. Aristides too!--we are fortunate."

The speaker was a young man of slighter make and lower stature
than the Athenians, but well shaped, and with features the partial
effeminacy of which was elevated by an expression of great vivacity
and intelligence. The steed trained for Elis never bore in its
proportions the evidence of blood and rare breeding more visibly than
the dark brilliant eye of this young man, his broad low transparent
brow, expanded nostril and sensitive lip, revealed the passionate
and somewhat arrogant character of the vivacious Greek of the Aegean
Isles.

"Antagoras," replied Cimon, laying his hand with frank and somewhat
blunt cordiality on the Greek's shoulder, "like the grape of your own
Chios, you cannot fail to be welcome at all times. But why would you
seek us now ?"

"Because I will no longer endure the insolence of this rude Spartan.
Will you believe it, Cimon--will you believe it, Aristides? Pausanias
has actually dared to sentence to blows, to stripes, one of my own
men--a free Chian--nay, a Decadarchus.[10] I have but this instant
heard it. And the offence--Gods! the _offence!_--was that he ventured
to contest with a Laconian, an underling in the Spartan army, which
one of the two had the fair right to a wine cask! Shall this be borne,
Cimon?"

"Stripes to a Greek!" said Cimon. and the colour mounted to his brow.
"Thinks Pausanias that the Ionian race are already his Helots?"

"Be calm," said Aristides; "Pausanias approaches. I will accost him."

"But listen still!" exclaimed Antagoras eagerly, plucking the gown of
the Athenian as the latter turned away. "When Pausanias heard of the
contest between my soldier and his Laconian, what said he, think you?
'Prior claim; learn henceforth that, where the Spartans are to be
found, the Spartans in all matters have the prior claim.'"

"We will see to it," returned Aristides, calmly; "but keep by my
side."

And now the music sounded loud and near, and suddenly, as the
procession approached, the character of that music altered. The Lydian
measures ceased, those who had attuned them gave way to musicians of
loftier aspect and simpler garb; in whom might be recognized, not indeed
the genuine Spartans, but their free, if subordinate, countrymen of
Laconia; and a minstrel, who walked beside them, broke out into a song,
partially adapted from the bold and lively strain of Alcaeus, the first
two lines in each stanza ringing much to that chime, the two latter
reduced into briefer compass, as, with allowance for the differing laws
of national rhythm, we thus seek to render the verse:

SONG.

    Multitudes, backward! Way for the Dorian;
    Way for the Lord of rocky Laconia;
      Heaven to Hercules opened
        Way on the earth for his son.

    Steel and fate, blunted, break on his fortitude;
    Two evils only never endureth he--
      Death by a wound in retreating,
        Life with a blot on his name.

    Rocky his birthplace; rocks are immutable;
    So are his laws, and so shall his glory be.
      Time is the Victor of Nations,
        Sparta the Victor of Time.

    Watch o'er him heedful on the wide ocean,
    Brothers of Helen, luminous guiding stars;
      Dangerous to Truth are the fickle,
        Dangerous to Sparta the seas.

    Multitudes, backward! Way for the Conqueror;
    Way for the footstep half the world fled before;
      Nothing that Phoebus can shine on
        Needs so much space as Renown.

Behind the musicians came ten Spartans, selected from the celebrated
three hundred who claimed the right to be stationed around the king
in battle. Tall, stalwart, sheathed in armour, their shields slung at
their backs, their crests of plumage or horsehair waving over their
strong and stern features, these hardy warriors betrayed to the keen
eye of Aristides their sullen discontent at the part assigned to
them in the luxurious procession; their brows were knit, their lips
contracted, and each of them who caught the glance of the Athenians,
turned his eyes, as half in shame, half in anger, to the ground.

Coming now upon the quay, opposite to the galley of Pausanias, from
which was suspended a ladder of silken cords, the procession halted,
and opening on either side, left space in the midst for the commander.

"He comes," whispered Antagoras to Cimon. "By Hercules! I pray you
survey him well. Is it the conqueror of Mardonius, or the ghost of
Mardonius himself?"

The question of the Chian seemed not extravagant to the blunt son of
Miltiades, as his eyes now rested on Pausanias.

The pure Spartan race boasted, perhaps, the most superb models of
masculine beauty which the land blessed by Apollo could afford. The
laws that regulate marriage ensured a healthful and vigorous progeny.
Gymnastic discipline from early boyhood gave ease to the limbs, iron
to the muscle, grace to the whole frame. Every Spartan, being born to
command, being noble by his birth, lord of the Laconians, Master of
the Helots, superior in the eyes of Greece to all other Greeks, was at
once a Republican and an Aristocrat. Schooled in the arts that compose
the presence, and give calmness and majesty to the bearing, he
combined with the mere physical advantages of activity and strength a
conscious and yet natural dignity of mien. Amidst the Greeks assembled
at the Olympian contests, others showed richer garments, more
sumptuous chariots, rarer steeds, but no state could vie with Sparta
in the thews and sinews, the aspect and the majesty of the men.
Nor were the royal race, the descendants of Hercules, in external
appearance unworthy of their countrymen and of their fabled origin.

Sculptor and painter would have vainly tasked their imaginative minds
to invent a nobler ideal for the effigies of a hero, than that which
the Victor of Plataea offered to their inspiration. As he now paused
amidst the group, he towered high above them all, even above Cimon
himself. But in his stature there was nothing of the cumbrous bulk and
stolid heaviness, which often destroy the beauty of vast strength.
Severe and early training, long habits of rigid abstemiousness, the
toils of war, and, more than all, perhaps, the constant play of
a restless, anxious, aspiring temper, had left, undisfigured by
superfluous flesh, the grand proportions of a frame, the very
spareness of which had at once the strength and the beauty of one of
those hardy victors in the wrestling or boxing match, whose agility
and force are modelled by discipline to the purest forms of grace.
Without that exact and chiselled harmony of countenance which
characterised perhaps the Ionic rather than the Doric race, the
features of the royal Spartan were noble and commanding. His
complexion was sunburnt, almost to oriental swarthiness, and the
raven's plume had no darker gloss than that of his long hair, which
(contrary to the Spartan custom), flowing on either side, mingled
with the closer curls of the beard. To a scrutinizing gaze, the more
dignified and prepossessing effect of this exterior would perhaps have
been counterbalanced by an eye, bright indeed and penetrating, but
restless and suspicious, by a certain ineffable mixture of arrogant
pride and profound melancholy in the general expression of the
countenance, ill according with that frank and serene aspect which
best becomes the face of one who would lead mankind. About him
altogether--the countenance, the form, the bearing--there was that
which woke a vague, profound, and singular interest, an interest
somewhat mingled with awe, but not altogether uncalculated to produce
that affection which belongs to admiration, save when the sudden frown
or disdainful lip repelled the gentler impulse and tended rather to
excite fear, or to irritate pride, or to wound self-love.

But if the form and features of Pausanias were eminently those of
the purest race of Greece, the dress which he assumed was no less
characteristic of the Barbarian. He wore, not the garb of the noble
Persian race, which, close and simple, was but a little less manly
than that of the Greeks, but the flowing and gorgeous garments of the
Mede. His long gown, which swept the earth, was covered with flowers
wrought in golden tissue. Instead of the Spartan hat, the high Median
cap or tiara crowned his perfumed and lustrous hair, while (what
of all was most hateful to Grecian eyes) he wore, though otherwise
unarmed, the curved scimitar and short dirk that were the national
weapons of the Barbarian. And as it was not customary, nor indeed
legitimate, for the Greeks to wear weapons on peaceful occasions
and with their ordinary costume, so this departure from the common
practice had not only in itself something offensive to the jealous
eyes of his comrades, but was rendered yet more obnoxious by the
adoption of the very arms of the East.

By the side of Pausanias was a man whose dark beard was already sown
with grey. This man, named Gongylus, though a Greek--a native of
Eretria, in Euboea--was in high command under the great Persian king.
At the time of the barbarian invasion under Datis and Artaphernes,
he had deserted the cause of Greece and had been rewarded with the
lordship of four towns in Aeolis. Few among the apostate Greeks were
more deeply instructed in the language and manners of the Persians;
and the intimate and sudden friendship that had grown up between him
and the Spartan was regarded by the Greeks with the most bitter and
angry suspicion. As if to show his contempt for the natural jealousy
of his countrymen, Pausanias, however, had just given to the Eretrian
the government of Byzantium itself, and with the command of the
citadel had entrusted to him the custody of the Persian prisoners
captured in that port. Among these were men of the highest rank and
influence at the court of Xerxes; and it was more than rumoured that
of late Pausanias had visited and conferred with them, through the
interpretation of Gongylus, far more frequently than became the
General of the Greeks. Gongylus had one of those countenances which
are observed when many of more striking semblance are overlooked.
But the features were sharp and the visage lean, the eyes vivid and
sparkling as those of the lynx, and the dark pupil seemed yet more
dark from the extreme whiteness of the ball, from which it lessened or
dilated with the impulse of the spirit which gave it fire. There was
in that eye all the subtle craft, the plotting and restless malignity
which usually characterised those Greek renegades who prostituted
their native energies to the rich service of the Barbarian; and the
lips, narrow and thin, wore that everlasting smile which to the
credulous disguises wile, and to the experienced betrays it. Small,
spare, and prematurely bent, the Eretrian supported himself by a
staff, upon which now leaning, he glanced, quickly and pryingly,
around, till his eyes rested upon the Athenians, with the young Chian
standing in their rear.

"The Athenian Captains are here to do you homage, Pausanias," said he
in a whisper, as he touched with his small lean fingers the arm of the
Spartan.

Pausanias turned and muttered to himself, and at that instant
Aristides approached.

"If it please you, Pausanias, Cimon and myself, the leaders of the
Athenians, would crave a hearing upon certain matters."

"Son of Lysimachus, say on."

"Your pardon, Pausanias," returned the Athenian, lowering his voice,
and with a smile--"This is too crowded a council-hall; may we attend
you on board your galley?"

"Not so," answered the Spartan haughtily; "the morning to affairs, the
evening to recreation. We shall sail in the bay to see the moon rise,
and if we indulge in consultations, it will be over our winecups. It
is a good custom."

"It is a Persian one," said Cimon bluntly.

"It is permitted to us," returned the Spartan coldly, "to borrow from
those we conquer. But enough of this. I have no secrets with the
Athenians. No matter if the whole city hear what you would address to
Pausanias."

"It is to complain," said Aristides with calm emphasis, but still in
an undertone.

"Ay, I doubt it not: the Athenians are eloquent in grumbling."

"It was not found so at Plataea," returned Cimon.

"Son of Miltiades," said Pausanias loftily, "your wit outruns your
experience. But my time is short. To the matter!"

"If you will have it so, I will speak," said Aristides, raising his
voice. "Before your own Spartans, our comrades in arms, I proclaim our
causes of complaint. Firstly, then, I demand release and compensation
to seven Athenians, free-born and citizens, whom your orders have
condemned to the unworthy punishment of standing all day in the open
sun with the weight of iron anchors on their shoulders."

"The mutinous knaves!" exclaimed the Spartan. "They introduced into
the camp the insolence of their own agora, and were publicly heard in
the streets inveighing against myself as a favourer of the Persians."

"It was easy to confute the charge; it was tyrannical to punish words
in men whose deeds had raised you to the command of Greece."

"_Their_ deeds! Ye Gods, give me patience! By the help of Juno the
protectress it was this brain and this arm that--But I will not
justify myself by imitating the Athenian fashion of wordy boasting.
Pass on to your next complaint."

"You have placed slaves--yes, Helots--around the springs, to drive
away with scourges the soldiers that come for water."

"Not so, but merely to prevent others from filling their vases until
the Spartans are supplied."

"And by what right--?" began Cimon, but Aristides checked him with a
gesture, and proceeded.

"That precedence is not warranted by custom, nor by the terms of
our alliance; and the springs, O Pausanias, are bounteous enough to
provide for all. I proceed. You have formally sentenced citizens and
soldiers to the scourge. Nay, this very day you have extended the
sentence to one in actual command amongst the Chians. Is it not so,
Antagoras?"

"It is," said the young Chian, coming forward boldly; "and in the name
of my countrymen I demand justice."

"And I also, Uliades of Samos," said a thickset and burly Greek who
had joined the group unobserved, "_I_ demand justice. What, by the
Gods! Are we to be all equals in the day of battle? 'My good sir,
march here;' and, 'My dear sir, just run into that breach;' and yet
when we have won the victory and should share the glory, is one state,
nay, one man to seize the whole, and deal out iron anchors and tough
cowhides to his companions? No, Spartans, this is not your view of the
case; you suffer in the eyes of Greece by this misconduct. To Sparta
itself I appeal."

"And what, most patient sir," said Pausanias, with calm sarcasm,
though his eye shot fire, and the upper lip, on which no Spartan
suffered the beard to grow, slightly quivered--"what is your
contribution to the catalogue of complaints?"

"Jest not, Pausanias; you will find me in earnest," answered Uliades,
doggedly, and encouraged by the evident effect that his eloquence had
produced upon the Spartans themselves. "I have met with a grievous
wrong, and all Greece shall hear of it, if it be not redressed. My own
brother, who at Mycale slew four Persians with his own hand, headed a
detachment for forage. He and his men were met by a company of mixed
Laconians and Helots, their forage taken from them, they themselves
assaulted, and my brother, a man who has monies and maintains forty
slaves of his own, struck thrice across the face by a rascally Helot.
Now, Pausanias, your answer!"

"You have prepared a notable scene for the commander of your forces,
son of Lysimachus," said the Spartan, addressing himself to Aristides.
"Far be it from me to affect the Agamemnon, but your friends are less
modest in imitating the venerable model of Thersites. Enough" (and
changing the tone of his voice, the chief stamped his foot vehemently
to the ground): "we owe no account to our inferiors; we render no
explanation save to Sparta and her Ephors."

"So be it, then," said Aristides, gravely; "we have our answer, and
you will hear of our appeal."

Pausanias changed colour. "How?" said he, with a slight hesitation in
his tone. "Mean you to threaten me--Me--with carrying the busy tales
of your disaffection to the Spartan government?"

"Time will show. Farewell, Pausanias. We will detain you no longer
from your pastime."

"But," began Uliades.

"Hush," said the Athenian, laying his hand on the Samian's shoulder.
"We will confer anon."

Pausanias paused a moment, irresolute and in thought. His eyes glanced
towards his own countrymen, who, true to their rigid discipline,
neither spake nor moved, but whose countenances were sullen and
overcast, and at that moment his pride was shaken, and his heart
misgave him. Gongylus watched his countenance, and once more laying
his hand on his arm, said in a whisper--

"He who seeks to rule never goes back."

"Tush, you know not the Spartans."

"But I know Human Nature; it is the same everywhere. You cannot yield
to this insolence; to-morrow, of your own accord, send for these men
separately and pacify them."

"You are right. Now to the vessel!"

With this, leaning on the shoulder of the Persian, and with a slight
wave of his hand towards the Athenians--he did not deign even that
gesture to the island officers--Pausanias advanced to the vessel, and
slowly ascending, disappeared within his pavilion. The Spartans and
the musicians followed; then, spare and swarthy, some half score of
Egyptian sailors; last came a small party of Laconians and Helots,
who, standing at some distance behind Pausanias, had not hitherto been
observed. The former were but slightly armed; the latter had forsaken
their customary rude and savage garb, and wore long gowns and gay
tunics, somewhat in the fashion of the Lydians. With these last there
was one of a mien and aspect that strongly differed from the lowering
and ferocious cast of countenance common to the Helot race. He was
of the ordinary stature, and his frame was not characterised by any
appearance of unusual strength; but he trod the earth, with a firm
step and an erect crest, as if the curse of the slave had not yet
destroyed the inborn dignity of the human being. There was a certain
delicacy and refinement, rather of thought than beauty, in his clear,
sharp, and singularly intelligent features. In contradistinction from
the free-born Spartans, his hair was short, and curled close above a
broad and manly forehead; and his large eyes of dark blue looked full
and bold upon the Athenians with something, if not of defiance, at
least of pride in their gaze, as he stalked by them to the vessel.

"A sturdy fellow for a Helot," muttered Cimon.

"And merits well his freedom," said the son of Lysimachus. "I remember
him well. He is Alcman, the foster-brother of Pausanias, whom he
attended at Plataea. Not a Spartan that day bore himself more
bravely."

"No doubt they will put him to death when he goes back to Sparta,"
said Antagoras. "When a Helot is brave, the Ephors clap the black mark
against his name, and at the next crypteia he suddenly disappears."

"Pausanias may share the same fate as his Helot, for all I care,"
quoth Uliades. "Well, Athenians, what say you to the answer we have
received?"

"That Sparta shall hear of it," answered Aristides.

"Ah, but is that all? Recollect the Ionians have the majority in the
fleet; let us not wait for the slow Ephors. Let us at once throw off
this insufferable yoke, and proclaim Athens the Mistress of the Seas.
What say you, Cimon?"

"Let Aristides answer."

"Yonder lie the Athenian vessels," said Aristides. "Those who put
themselves voluntarily under our protection we will not reject. But
remember we assert no claim; we yield but to the general wish."

"Enough; I understand you," said Antagoras.

"Not quite," returned the Athenian with a smile. "The breach between
you and Pausanias is begun, but it is not yet wide enough. You
yourselves must do that which will annul all power in the Spartan, and
then if ye come to Athens ye will find her as bold against the Doric
despot as against the Barbarian foe."

"But speak more plainly. What would you have us do?" asked Uliades,
rubbing his chin in great perplexity.

"Nay, nay, I have already said enough. Fare ye well,
fellow-countrymen," and leaning lightly on the shoulder of Cimon, the
Athenian passed on.

Meanwhile, the splendid galley of Pausanias slowly put forth into the
farther waters of the bay. The oars of the rowers broke the surface
into countless phosphoric sparkles, and the sound they made, as they
dashed amidst the gentle waters, seemed to keep time with the song
and the instruments on the deck. The Ionians gazed in silence as the
stately vessel, now shooting far ahead of the rest, swept into the
centre of the bay. And the moon, just rising, shone full upon the
glittering prow, and streaked the rippling billows over which it had
bounded, with a light, as it were, of glory.

Antagoras sighed. "What think you of?" asked the rough Samian.

"Peace," replied Antagoras. "In this hour, when the fair face of
Artemis recalls the old legends of Endymion, is it not permitted to
man to remember that before the iron age came the golden, before war
reigned love?"

"Tush," said Uliades. "Time enough to think of love when we have
satisfied vengeance. Let us summon our friends, and hold council on
the Spartan's insults."

"Whither goes now the Spartan?" murmured Antagoras abstractedly, as
he suffered his companion to lead him away. Then halting abruptly, he
struck his clenched hand on his breast.

"O Aphrodite!" he cried; "this night--this night I will seek thy
temple. Hear my vows--soothe my jealousy!"

"Ah," grunted Uliades, "if, as men say, thou lovest a fair Byzantine,
Aphrodite will have sharp work to cure thee of jealousy, unless she
first makes thee blind."

Antagoras smiled faintly, and the two Ionians moved on slowly and in
silence. In a few minutes more the quays were deserted and nothing but
the blended murmur, spreading wide and indistinct throughout the camp,
and a noisier but occasional burst of merriment from those resorts
of obscener pleasure which were profusely scattered along the haven,
mingled with the whispers of "the far resounding sea."


Notes:

[5] Gibbon, ch. 17.

[6] "The harbour of Constantinople, which may be considered as an arm
of the Bosphorus, obtained in a very remote period the denomination of
the Golden Horn. The curve which it describes might be compared to the
horn of a stag, or, as it should seem, with more propriety to that of
an ox."--Gib. c. 17; Strab. 1. x.

[7] Ion _apud_ Plut.

[8] Herod. ix. 82.

[9] Plut. in Vit. Arist.

[10] Leader of ten men.




CHAPTER II.


On a couch, beneath his voluptuous awning, reclined Pausanias. The
curtains, drawn aside, gave to view the moonlit ocean, and the dim
shadows of the shore, with the dark woods beyond, relieved by the
distant lights of the city. On one side of the Spartan was a small
table, that supported goblets and vases of that exquisite wine which
Maronea proffered to the thirst of the Byzantine, and those cooling
and delicious fruits which the orchards around the city supplied as
amply as the fabled gardens of the Hesperides, were heaped on the
other side. Towards the foot of the couch, propped upon cushions piled
on the floor, sat Gongylus, conversing in a low, earnest voice,
and fixing his eyes steadfastly on the Spartan. The habits of the
Eretrian's life, which had brought him in constant contact with
the Persians, had infected his very language with the luxuriant
extravagance of the East. And the thoughts he uttered made his
language but too musical to the ears of the listening Spartan.

"And fair as these climes may seem to you, and rich as are the gardens
and granaries of Byzantium, yet to me who have stood on the terraces
of Babylon and looked upon groves covering with blossom and fruit the
very fortresses and walls of that queen of nations,--to me, who have
roved amidst the vast delights of Susa, through palaces whose very
porticoes might enclose the limits of a Grecian city,--who have stood,
awed and dazzled, in the courts of that wonder of the world, that
crown of the East, the marble magnificence of Persepolis--to me,
Pausanias, who have been thus admitted into the very heart of Persian
glories, this city of Byzantium appears but a village of artisans and
fishermen. The very foliage of its forests, pale and sickly, the very
moonlight upon these waters, cold and smileless, ah, if thou couldst
but see! But pardon me, I weary thee?"

"Not so," said the Spartan, who, raised upon his elbow, listened to
the words of Gongylus with deep attention. "Proceed." "Ah, if thou
couldst but see the fair regions which the great king has apportioned
to thy countryman Demaratus. And if a domain, that would satiate
the ambition of the most craving of your earlier tyrants, fall to
Demaratus, what would be the splendid satrapy in which the conqueror
of Plataea might plant his throne?"

"In truth, my renown and my power are greater than those ever
possessed by Demaratus," said the Spartan musingly.

"Yet," pursued Gongylus, "it is not so much the mere extent of the
territories which the grateful Xerxes could proffer to the brave
Pausanias--it is not their extent so much that might tempt desire,
neither is it their stately forests, nor the fertile meadows, nor the
ocean-like rivers, which the gods of the East have given to the race
of Cyrus. There, free from the strange constraints which our austere
customs and solemn Deities impose upon the Greeks, the beneficent
Ormuzd scatters ever-varying delights upon the paths of men. All that
art can invent, all that the marts of the universe can afford of the
rare and voluptuous, are lavished upon abodes the splendour of which
even our idle dreams of Olympus never shadowed forth. There, instead
of the harsh and imperious helpmate to whom the joyless Spartan
confines his reluctant love, all the beauties of every clime contend
for the smile of their lord. And wherever are turned the change-loving
eyes of Passion, the Aphrodite of our poets, such as the Cytherean and
the Cyprian fable her, seems to recline on the lotus leaf or to rise
from the unruffled ocean of delight. Instead of the gloomy brows and
the harsh tones of rivals envious of your fame, hosts of friends
aspiring only to be followers will catch gladness from your smile or
sorrow from your frown. There, no jarring contests with little men,
who deem themselves the equals of the great, no jealous Ephor is
found, to load the commonest acts of life with fetters of iron custom.
Talk of liberty! Liberty in Sparta is but one eternal servitude; you
cannot move, or eat, or sleep, save as the law directs. Your very
children are wrested from you just in the age when their voices sound
most sweet. Ye are not men; ye are machines. Call you this liberty,
Pausanias? I, a Greek, have known both Grecian liberty and Persian
royalty Better be chieftain to a king than servant to a mob! But in
Eretria, at least, pleasure was not denied. In Sparta the very Graces
preside over discipline and war only."

"Your fire falls upon flax," said Pausanias, rising, and with
passionate emotion. "And if you, the Greek of a happier state, you who
know but by report the unnatural bondage to which the Spartans are
subjected, can weary of the very name of Greek, what must be the
feelings of one who from the cradle upward has been starved out of the
genial desires of life? Even in earliest youth, while yet all other
lands and customs were unknown, when it was duly poured into my ears
that to be born a Spartan constituted the glory and the bliss of
earth, my soul sickened at the lesson, and my reason revolted against
the lie. Often when my whole body was lacerated with stripes,
disdaining to groan, I yet yearned to strike, and I cursed my savage
tutors who denied pleasure even to childhood with all the madness
of impotent revenge. My mother herself (sweet name elsewhere) had no
kindness in her face. She was the pride of the matronage of Sparta,
because of all our women Alithea was the most unsexed. When I went
forth to my first crypteia, to watch, amidst the wintry dreariness of
the mountains, upon the movements of the wretched Helots, to spy upon
their sufferings, to take account of their groans, and if one more
manly than the rest dared to mingle curses with his groans, to mark
_him_ for slaughter, as a wolf that threatened danger to the fold; to
lurk, an assassin, about his home, to dog his walks, to fall on him
unawares, to strike him from behind, to filch away his life, to bury
him in the ravines, so that murder might leave no trace; when upon
this initiating campaign, the virgin trials of our youth, I first set
forth, my mother drew near, and girding me herself with my grandsire's
sword, 'Go forth,' she said, 'as the young hound to the chase, to
wind, to double, to leap on the prey, and to taste of blood. See, the
sword is bright; show me the stains at thy return,'"

"Is it then true, as the Greeks generally declare," interrupted
Gongylus, "that in these campaigns, or crypteias, the sole aim and
object is the massacre of Helots?"

"Not so," replied Pausanias; "savage though the custom, it smells not
so foully of the shambles. The avowed object is to harden the nerves
of our youth. Barefooted, unattended, through cold and storm,
performing ourselves the most menial offices necessary to life, we
wander for a certain season daily and nightly through the rugged
territories of Laconia.[11] We go as boys--we come back as men.[12]
The avowed object, I say, is increment to hardship, but with this is
connected the secret end of keeping watch on these half-tamed and
bull-like herds of men whom we call the Helots. If any be dangerous,
we mark him for the knife. One of them had thrice been a ringleader
in revolt. He was wary as well as fierce. He had escaped in three
succeeding crypteias. To me, as one of the Heraclidae, was assigned
the honour of tracking and destroying him. For three days and three
nights I dogged his footsteps, (for he had caught the scent of the
pursuers and fled,) through forest and defile, through valley and crag,
stealthily and relentlessly. I followed him close. At last, one evening,
having lost sight of all my comrades, I came suddenly upon him as I
emerged from a wood. It was a broad patch of waste land, through which
rushed a stream swollen by the rains, and plunging with a sullen roar
down a deep and gloomy precipice, that to the right and left bounded the
waste, the stream in front, the wood in the rear. He was reclining by
the stream, at which, with the hollow of his hand, he quenched his
thirst. I paused to gaze upon him, and as I did so he turned and saw
me. He rose, and fixed his eyes on mine, and we examined each other in
silence. The Helots are rarely of tall stature, but this was a giant.
His dress, that of his tribe, of rude sheep-skins, and his cap
made from the hide of a dog increased the savage rudeness of his
appearance. I rejoiced that he saw me, and that, as we were alone, I
might fight him fairly. It would have been terrible to slay the wretch
if I had caught him in his sleep."

"Proceed," said Gongylus, with interest, for so little was known of
Sparta by the rest of the Greeks, especially outside the Peloponnesus,
that these details gratified his natural spirit of gossiping
inquisitiveness.

"'Stand!' said I, and he moved not. I approached him slowly. 'Thou art
a Spartan,' said he, in a deep and harsh voice, 'and thou comest for
my blood. Go, boy, go, thou art not mellowed to thy prime, and thy
comrades are far away. The shears of the Fatal deities hover over the
thread not of my life but of thine.' I was struck, Gongylus, by
this address, for it was neither desperate nor dastardly, as I had
anticipated; nevertheless, it beseemed not a Spartan to fly from a
Helot, and I drew the sword which my mother had girded on. The Helot
watched my movements, and seized a rude and knotted club that lay on
the ground beside him.

"'Wretch,' said I, 'darest thou attack face to face a descendant of
the Heraclidae? In me behold Pausanias, the son of Cleombrotus.'

"'Be it so; in the city one is the god-born, the other the
man-enslaved. On the mountains we are equals.'

"'Knowest thou not,' said I, 'that if the Gods condemned me to die
by thy hand, not only thou, but thy whole house, thy wife and thy
children, would be sacrificed to my ghost?"

"'The earth can hide the Spartan's bones as secretly as the Helot's,'
answered my strange foe. 'Begone, young and unfleshed in slaughter as
you are; why make war upon me? My death can give you neither gold nor
glory. I have never harmed thee or thine. How much of the air and sun
does this form take from the descendant of the Heraclidae?'

"'Thrice hast thou raised revolt among the Helots, thrice at thy voice
have they risen in bloody, though fruitless, strife against their
masters.'

"'Not at my voice, but at that of the two deities who are the war-gods
of slaves--Persecution and Despair.'[13] "Impatient of this parley, I
tarried no longer. I sprang upon the Helot. He evaded my sword, and
I soon found that all my agility and skill were requisite to save me
from the massive weapon, one blow of which would have sufficed
to crush me. But the Helot seemed to stand on the defensive, and
continued to back towards the wood from which I had emerged. Fearful
lest he would escape me, I pressed hard on his footsteps. My blood
grew warm; my fury got the better of my prudence. My foot stumbled;
I recovered in an instant, and, looking up, beheld the terrible club
suspended over my head; it might have fallen, but the stroke of death
was withheld. I misinterpreted the merciful delay; the lifted arm left
the body of my enemy exposed. I struck him on the side; the thick hide
blunted the stroke, but it drew blood. Afraid to draw back within
the reach of his weapon, I threw myself on him, and grappled to
his throat. We rolled on the earth together; it was but a moment's
struggle. Strong as I was even in boyhood, the Helot would have been
a match for Alcides. A shade passed over my eyes; my breath heaved
short. The slave was kneeling on my breast, and, dropping the club, he
drew a short knife from his girdle. I gazed upon him grim and mute. I
was conquered, and I cared not for the rest.

"The blood from his side, as he bent over me, trickled down upon my
face. "'And this blood,' said the Helot, 'you shed in the very moment
when I spared your life; such is the honour of a Spartan. Do you not
deserve to die?'

"'Yes, for I am subdued, and by a slave. Strike!'

"'There,' said the Helot in a melancholy and altered tone, 'there
speaks the soul of the Dorian, the fatal spirit to which the Gods have
rendered up our wretched race. We are doomed--doomed--and one victim
will not expiate our curse. Rise, return to Sparta, and forget that
thou art innocent of murder.'

"He lifted his knee from my breast, and I rose, ashamed and humbled.

"At that instant I heard the crashing of the leaves in the wood, for
the air was exceedingly still. I knew that my companions were at hand.
'Fly,' I cried; 'fly. If they come I cannot save thee, royal though I
be. Fly.'

"'And _wouldest_ thou save me!' said the Helot in surprise.

"'Ay, with my own life. Canst thou doubt it? Lose not a moment. Fly.
Yet stay;' and I tore off a part of the woollen vest that I wore.
'Place this at thy side; staunch the blood, that it may not track
thee. Now begone!'

"The Helot looked hard at me, and I thought there were tears in his
rude eyes; then catching up the club with as much ease as I this
staff, he sped with inconceivable rapidity, despite his wound, towards
the precipice on the right, and disappeared amidst the thick brambles
that clothed the gorge. In a few moments three of my companions
approached. They found me exhausted, and panting rather with
excitement than fatigue. Their quick eyes detected the blood upon the
ground. I gave them no time to pause and examine. 'He has escaped
me--he has fled,' I cried; 'follow,' and I led them to the opposite
part of the precipice from that which the Helot had taken. Heading the
search, I pretended to catch a glimpse of the goatskin ever and anon
through the trees, and I stayed not the pursuit till night grew dark,
and I judged the victim was far away."

"And he escaped?"

"He did. The crypteia ended. Three other Helots were slain, but not
by me. We returned to Sparta, and my mother was comforted for my
misfortune in not having slain my foe by seeing the stains on my
grandsire's sword, I will tell thee a secret, Gongylus"--(and here
Pausanias lowered his voice, and looked anxiously toward him)---"since
that day I have not hated the Helot race. Nay, it may be that I have
loved them better than the Dorian."

"I do not wonder at it; but has not your wounded giant yet met with
his death?"

"No, I never related what had passed between us to any one save
my father. He was gentle for a Spartan, and he rested not till
Gylippus--so was the Helot named--obtained exemption from the black
list. He dared not, however, attribute his intercession to the true
cause. It happened, fortunately, that Gylippus was related to my own
foster-brother, Alcman, brother to my nurse; and Alcman is celebrated
in Sparta, not only for courage in war, but for arts in peace. He is
a poet, and his strains please the Dorian ear, for they are stern and
simple, and they breathe of war. Alcman's merits won forgiveness for
the offences of Gylippus. May the Gods be kind to his race!"

"Your Alcman seems one of no common intelligence, and your gentleness
to him does not astonish me, though it seems often to raise a frown on
the brows of your Spartans."

"We have lain on the same bosom," said Pausanias touchingly, "and
his mother was kinder to me than my own. You must know that to those
Helots who have been our foster-brothers, and whom we distinguish by
the name of Mothons, our stern law relaxes. They have no rights
of citizenship, it is true, but they cease to be slaves;[14] nay,
sometimes they attain not only to entire emancipation, but to
distinction. Alcman has bound his fate to mine. But to return,
Gongylus. I tell thee that it is not thy descriptions of pomp and
dominion that allure me, though I am not above the love of power,
neither is it thy glowing promises, though blood too wild for a Dorian
runs riot in my veins; but it is my deep loathing, my inexpressible
disgust for Sparta and her laws, my horror at the thought of wearing
away life in those sullen customs, amid that joyless round of tyrannic
duties, in my rapture at the hope of escape, of life in a land which
the eye of the Ephor never pierces; this it is, and this alone, O
Persian, that makes me (the words must out) a traitor to my country,
one who dreams of becoming a dependent on her foe."

"Nay," said Gongylus eagerly; for here Pausanias moved uneasily,
and the colour mounted to his brow. "Nay, speak not of dependence.
Consider the proposals that you can alone condescend to offer to
the great king. Can the conqueror of Plataea, with millions for his
subjects, hold himself dependent, even on the sovereign of the East?
How, hereafter, will the memories of our sterile Greece and your
rocky Sparta fade from your mind: or be remembered only as a state of
thraldom and bondage, which your riper manhood has outgrown!"

"I will try to think so, at least," said Pausanias gloomily. "And,
come what may, I am not one to recede. I have thrown my shield into
a fearful peril; but I will win it back or perish. Enough of this,
Gongylus. Night advances. I will attend the appointment you have made.
Take the boat, and within an hour I will meet you with the prisoners
at the spot agreed on, near the Temple of Aphrodite. All things are
prepared?"

"All," said Gongylus, rising, with a gleam of malignant joy on his
dark face. "I leave thee, kingly slave of the rocky Sparta, to prepare
the way for thee, as Satrap of half the East."

So saying he quitted the awning, and motioned three Egyptian sailors
who lay on the deck without. A boat was lowered, and the sound of its
oars woke Pausanias from the reverie into which the parting words of
the Eretrian had plunged his mind.


Notes:

[11] Plat. Leg. i. p. 633. See also Mller's Dorians, vol. ii. p. 41.

[12] Pueros puberos--neque prius in urbem redire quam viri facti
essent.--Justin, iii. 3.

[13] When Themistocles sought to extort tribute from the Andrians, he
said, "I bring with me two powerful gods--Persuasion and Force."
"And on our side," was the answer, "are two deities not less
powerful--Poverty and Despair!"

[14] The appellation of Mothons was not confined to the Helots who
claimed the connection of foster-brothers, but was given also to
household slaves.




CHAPTER III


With a slow and thoughtful step, Pausanias passed on to the outer
deck. The moon was up, and the vessel scarcely seemed to stir, so
gently did it glide along the sparkling waters. They were still within
the bay, and the shores rose, white and distinct, to his view. A group
of Spartans, reclining by the side of the ship, were gazing listlessly
on the waters. The Regent paused beside them.

"Ye weary of the ocean, methinks," said he. "We Dorians have not the
merchant tastes of the Ionians."[15]

"Son of Cleombrotus," said one of the group, a Spartan whose rank
and services entitled him to more than ordinary familiarity with the
chief, "it is not the ocean itself that we should dread, it is the
contagion of those who, living on the element, seem to share in its
ebb and flow. The Ionians are never three hours in the same mind."

"For that reason," said Pausanias, fixing his eyes steadfastly on the
Spartan, "for that reason I have judged it advisable to adopt a rough
manner with these innovators, to draw with a broad chalk the line
between them and the Spartans, and to teach those who never knew
discipline the stern duties of obedience. Think you I have done
wisely?"

The Spartan, who had risen when Pausanias addressed him, drew his
chief a little aside from the rest.

"Pausanias," said he, "the hard Naxian stone best tames and tempers
the fine steel;[16] but the steel may break if the workman be not
skilful. These Athenians are grown insolent since Marathon, and their
soft kindred of Asia have relighted the fires they took of old from
the Cecropian Prytaneum. Their sail is more numerous than ours; on the
sea they find the courage they lose on land. Better be gentle with
those wayward allies, for the Spartan greyhound shows not his teeth
but to bite."

"Perhaps you are right. I will consider these things, and appease the
mutineers. But it goes hard with my pride, Thrasyllus, to make equals
of this soft-tongued race. Why, these Ionians, do they not enjoy
themselves in perpetual holidays?--spend days at the banquet?--ransack
earth and sea for dainties and for perfumes?--and shall they be the
equals of us men, who, from the age of seven to that of sixty, are
wisely taught to make life so barren and toilsome, that we may well
have no fear of death? I hate these sleek and merry feast-givers; they
are a perpetual insult to our solemn existence."

There was a strange mixture of irony and passion in the Spartan's
voice as he thus spoke, and Thrasyllus looked at him in grave
surprise.

"There is nothing to envy in the woman-like debaucheries of the
Ionian," said he, after a pause.

"Envy! no; we only hate them, Thrasyllus Yon Eretrian tells me rare
things of the East. Time may come when we shall sup on the black broth
in Susa."

"The Gods forbid! Sparta never invades. Life with us is too precious,
for we are few. Pausanias, I would we were well quit of Byzantium. I
do not suspect you, not I; but there are those who look with vexed
eyes on those garments, and I, who love you, fear the sharp jealousies
of the Ephors, to whose ears the birds carry all tidings."

"My poor Thrasyllus," said Pausanias, laughing scornfully, "think you
that I wear these robes, or mimic the Median manners, for love of the
Mede? No, no! But there are arts which save countries as well as those
of war. This Gongylus is in the confidence of Xerxes. I desire to
establish a peace for Greece upon everlasting foundations. Reflect;
Persia hath millions yet left. Another invasion may find a different
fortune; and even at the best, Sparta gains nothing by these wars.
Athens triumphs, not Lacedaemon. I would, I say, establish a peace
with Persia. I would that Sparta, not Athens, should have that honour.
Hence these flatteries to the Persian--trivial to us who render
them, sweet and powerful to those who receive. Remember these words
hereafter, if the Ephors make question of my discretion. And now,
Thrasyllus, return to our friends, and satisfy them as to the conduct
of Pausanias." Quitting Thrasyllus, the Regent now joined a young
Spartan who stood alone by the prow in a musing attitude.

"Lysander, my friend, my only friend, my best-loved Lysander," said
Pausanias, placing his hand on the Spartan's shoulder. "And why so
sad?"

"How many leagues are we from Sparta?" answered Lysander mournfully.

"And canst thou sigh for the black broth, my friend? Come, how often
hast thou said, 'Where Pausanias is, _there_ is Sparta!'"

"Forgive me, I am ungrateful," said Lysander with warmth. "My
benefactor, my guardian, my hero, forgive me if I have added to your
own countless causes of anxiety. Wherever you are there is life, and
there glory. When I was just born, sickly and feeble, I was exposed
on Taygetus. You, then a boy, heard my faint cry, and took on me that
compassion which my parents had forsworn. You bore me to your father's
roof, you interceded for my life. You prevailed even on your stern
mother. I was saved; and the Gods smiled upon the infant whom the son
of the humane Hercules protected. I grew up strong and hardy, and
belied the signs of my birth. My parents then owned me; but still
you were my fosterer, my saviour, my more than father. As I grew up,
placed under your care, I imbibed my first lessons of war. By your
side I fought, and from your example I won glory. Yes, Pausanias, even
here, amidst luxuries which revolt me more than the Parthian bow and
the Persian sword, even amidst the faces of the stranger, I still feel
thy presence my home, thyself my Sparta."

The proud Pausanias was touched, and his voice trembled as he replied,
"Brother in arms and in love, whatever service fate may have allowed
me to render unto thee, thy high nature and thy cheering affection
have more than paid me back. Often in our lonely rambles amidst the
dark oaks of the sacred Scotitas,[17] or by the wayward waters of
Tiasa,[18] when I have poured into thy faithful breast my impatient
loathing, my ineffable distaste for the iron life, the countless and
wearisome tyrannies of custom which surround the Spartans, often have
I found a consoling refuge in thy divine contentment, thy cheerful
wisdom. Thou lovest Sparta; why is she not worthier of thy love?
Allowed only to be half men, in war we are demigods, in peace, slaves.
Thou wouldst interrupt me. Be silent. I am in a wilful mood; thou
canst not comprehend me, and I often marvel at thee. Still we are
friends, such friends as the Dorian discipline, which makes friendship
necessary in order to endure life, alone can form. Come, take up thy
staff and mantle. Thou shalt be my companion ashore. I seek one whom
alone in the world I love better than thee. To-morrow to stern duties
once more. Alcman shall row us across the bay, and as we glide along,
if thou wilt praise Sparta, I will listen to thee as the Ionians
listen to their tale-tellers. Ho! Alcman, stop the rowers, and lower
the boat."

The orders were obeyed, and a second boat soon darted towards the
same part of the bay as that to which the one that bore Gongylus had
directed its course. Thrasyllus and his companions watched the boat
that bore Pausanias and his two comrades, as it bounded, arrow-like,
over the glassy sea.

"Whither goes Pausanias?" asked one of the Spartans.

"Back to Byzantium on business," replied Thrasyllus.

"And we?"

"Are to cruise in the bay till his return.

"Pausanias is changed."

"Sparta will restore him to what he was. Nothing thrives out of
Sparta. Even man spoils."

"True, sleep is the sole constant friend the same in all climates."


Notes:

[15] No Spartan served as a sailor, or indeed condescended to any trade
or calling, but that of war.

[16] Pind. Isth. v. (vi.) 73.

[17] Paus. Lac. x.

[18] _Ib_., c. xviii.




CHAPTER IV


On the shore to the right of the port of Byzantium were at that time
thickly scattered the villas or suburban retreats of the wealthier and
more luxurious citizens. Byzantium was originally colonized by the
Megarians, a Dorian race kindred with that of Sparta; and the old
features of the pure and antique Hellas were still preserved in
the dialect,[19] as well as in the forms of the descendants of the
colonists; in their favourite deities, and rites, and traditions; even
in the names of places, transferred from the sterile Megara to that
fertile coast; in the rigid and helot-like slavery to which the native
Bithynians were subjected, and in the attachment of their masters to
the oligarchic principles of government. Nor was it till long after
the present date, that democracy in its most corrupt and licentious
form was introduced amongst them. But like all the Dorian colonies,
when once they departed from the severe and masculine mode of life
inherited from their ancestors, the reaction was rapid, the degeneracy
complete. Even then the Byzantines, intermingled with the foreign
merchants and traders that thronged their haven, and womanized by the
soft contagion of the East, were voluptuous, timid, and prone to every
excess save that of valour. The higher class were exceedingly wealthy,
and gave to their vices or their pleasures a splendour and refinement
of which the elder states of Greece were as yet unconscious. At a
later period, indeed, we are informed that the Byzantine citizens
had their habitual residence in the public hostels, and let their
houses--not even taking the trouble to remove their wives--to the
strangers who crowded their gay capital. And when their general found
it necessary to demand their aid on the ramparts, he could only secure
their attendance by ordering the taverns and cookshops to be removed
to the place of duty. Not yet so far sunk in sloth and debauch, the
Byzantines were nevertheless hosts eminently dangerous to the austerer
manners of their Greek visitors. The people, the women, the delicious
wine, the balm of the subduing climate served to tempt the senses
and relax the mind. Like all the Dorians, when freed from primitive
restraint, the higher class, that is, the descendants of the
colonists, were in themselves an agreeable, jovial race. They had that
strong bias to humour, to jest, to satire, which in their ancestral
Megara gave birth to the Grecian comedy, and which lurked even beneath
the pithy aphorisms and rude merry-makings of the severe Spartan.

Such were the people with whom of late Pausanias had familiarly mixed,
and with whose manners he contrasted, far too favourably for his
honour and his peace, the habits of his countrymen.

It was in one of the villas we have described, the favourite abode
of the rich Diagoras, and in an apartment connected with those more
private recesses of the house appropriated to the females, that two
persons were seated by a window which commanded a wide view of the
glittering sea below. One of these was an old man in a long robe that
reached to his feet, with a bald head and a beard in which some dark
hairs yet withstood the encroachments of the grey. In his well-cut
features and large eyes were remains of the beauty that characterised
his race; but the mouth was full and wide, the forehead low though
broad, the cheeks swollen, the chin double, and the whole form
corpulent and unwieldy. Still there was a jolly, sleek good humour
about the aspect of the man that prepossessed you in his favour. This
personage, who was no less than Diagoras himself, was reclining lazily
upon a kind of narrow sofa cunningly inlaid with ivory, and studying
new combinations in that scientific game which Palamedes is said to
have invented at the siege of Troy.

His companion was of a very different appearance. She was a girl who
to the eye of a northern stranger might have seemed about eighteen,
though she was probably much younger, of a countenance so remarkable
for intelligence that it was easy to see that her mind had outgrown
her years. Beautiful she certainly was, yet scarcely of that beauty
from which the Greek sculptor would have drawn his models. The
features were not strictly regular, and yet so harmoniously did each
blend with each, that to have amended one would have spoilt the whole.
There was in the fulness and depth of the large but genial eye, with
its sweeping fringe, and straight, slightly chiselled brow, more of
Asia than of Greece. The lips, of the freshest red, were somewhat
full and pouting, and dimples without number lay scattered round
them--lurking places for the loves. Her complexion was clear though
dark, and the purest and most virgin bloom mantled, now paler now
richer, through the soft surface. At the time we speak of she was
leaning against the open door with her arms crossed on her bosom, and
her face turned towards the Byzantine. Her robe, of a deep yellow, so
trying to the fair women of the North, became well the glowing colours
of her beauty--the damask cheek, the purple hair. Like those of the
Ionians, the sleeves of the robe, long and loose, descended to her
hands, which were marvellously small and delicate. Long earrings,
which terminated in a kind of berry, studded with precious stones,
then common only with the women of the East; a broad collar,
or necklace, of the smaragdus or emerald; and large clasps,
medallion-like, where the swan-like throat joined the graceful
shoulder, gave to her dress an appearance of opulence and splendour
that betokened how much the ladies of Byzantium had borrowed from the
fashions of the Oriental world. Nothing could exceed the lightness of
her form, rounded, it is true, but slight and girlish, and the high
instep, with the slender foot, so well set off by the embroidered
sandal, would have suited such dances as those in which the huntress
nymphs of Delos moved around Diana. The natural expression of her
face, if countenance so mobile and changeful had one expression more
predominant than another, appeared to be irresistibly arch and joyous,
as of one full of youth and conscious of her beauty; yet, if a cloud
came over the face, nothing could equal the thoughtful and deep
sadness of the dark abstracted eyes, as if some touch of higher and
more animated emotion--such as belongs to pride, or courage, or
intellect--vibrated on the heart. The colour rose, the form dilated,
the lip quivered, the eye flashed light, and the mirthful expression
heightened almost into the sublime. Yet, lovely as Cleonice was deemed
at Byzantium, lovelier still as she would have appeared in modern
eyes, she failed in what the Greeks generally, but especially the
Spartans, deemed an essential of beauty--in height of stature.
Accustomed to look upon the virgin but as the future mother of a race
of warriors, the Spartans saw beauty only in those proportions which
promised a robust and stately progeny, and the reader may remember
the well-known story of the opprobrious reproaches, even, it is said,
accompanied with stripes, which the Ephors addressed to a Spartan king
for presuming to make choice of a wife below the ordinary stature.
Cleonice was small and delicate, rather like the Peri of the Persian
than the sturdy Grace of the Dorian. But her beauty was her least
charm. She had all that feminine fascination of manner, wayward,
varying, inexpressible, yet irresistible, which seizes hold of the
imagination as well as the senses, and which has so often made willing
slaves of the proud rulers of the world. In fact Cleonice, the
daughter of Diagoras, had enjoyed those advantages of womanly
education wholly unknown at that time to the freeborn ladies of Greece
proper, but which gave to the women of some of the isles and Ionian
cities their celebrity in ancient story. Her mother was of Miletus,
famed for the intellectual cultivation of the sex, no less than for
their beauty--of Miletus, the birthplace of Aspasia--of Miletus,
from which those remarkable women who, under the name of Hetaerae,
exercised afterwards so signal an influence over the mind and manners
of Athens, chiefly derived their origin, and who seem to have inspired
an affection, which in depth, constancy, and fervour, approached to
the more chivalrous passion of the North. Such an education consisted
not only in the feminine and household arts honoured universally
throughout Greece, but in a kind of spontaneous and luxuriant
cultivation of all that captivates the fancy and enlivens the leisure.
If there were something pedantic in their affectation of philosophy,
it was so graced and vivified by a brilliancy of conversation, a charm
of manner carried almost to a science, a womanly facility of softening
all that comes within their circle, of suiting yet refining each
complexity and discord of character admitted to their intercourse,
that it had at least nothing masculine or harsh. Wisdom, taken lightly
or easily, seemed but another shape of poetry. The matrons of Athens,
who could often neither read nor write--ignorant, vain, tawdry, and
not always faithful, if we may trust to such scandal as has reached
the modern time--must have seemed insipid beside these brilliant
strangers; and while certainly wanting their power to retain love,
must have had but a doubtful superiority in the qualifications that
ensure esteem. But we are not to suppose that the Hetaerae (that
mysterious and important class peculiar to a certain state of society,
and whose appellation we cannot render by any proper word in modern
language) monopolized all the graces of their countrywomen. In the
same cities were many of unblemished virtue and repute who possessed
equal cultivation and attraction, but whom a more decorous life has
concealed from the equivocal admiration of posterity; though the
numerous female disciples of Pythagoras throw some light on their
capacity and intellect. Among such as these had been the mother of
Cleonice, not long since dead, and her daughter inherited and equalled
her accomplishments, while her virgin youth, her inborn playfulness
of manner, her pure guilelessness, which the secluded habits of the
unmarried women at Byzantium preserved from all contagion, gave to
qualities and gifts so little published abroad, the effect as it were
of a happy and wondrous inspiration rather than of elaborate culture.

Such was the fair creature whom Diagoras, looking up from his pastime,
thus addressed:--

"And so, perverse one, thou canst not love this great hero, a proper
person truly, and a mighty warrior, who will eat you an army of
Persians at a meal. These Spartan fighting-cocks want no garlic, I
warrant you.[20] And yet you can't love him, you little rogue."

"Why, my father," said Cleonice, with an arch smile, and a slight
blush, "even if I did look kindly on Pausanias, would it not be to my
own sorrow? What Spartan--above all, what royal Spartan--may marry
with a foreigner, and a Byzantine?"

"I did not precisely talk of marriage--a very happy state, doubtless,
to those who dislike too quiet a life, and a very honourable one, for
war is honor itself; but I did not speak of that, Cleonice. I would
only say that this man of might loves thee--that he is rich, rich,
rich. Pretty pickings at Plataea; and we have known losses, my child,
sad losses. And if you do not love him, why, you can but smile and
talk as if you did, and when the Spartan goes home, you will lose a
tormenter and gain a dowry."

"My father, for shame!"

"Who talks of shame? You women are always so sharp at finding oracles
in oak leaves, that one don't wonder Apollo makes choice of your sex
for his priests. But listen to me, girl, seriously," and here Diagoras
with a great effort raised himself on his elbow, and lowering his
voice, spoke with evident earnestness. "Pausanias has life and death,
and, what is worse, wealth or poverty in his hands; he can raise or
ruin us with a nod of his head, this black-curled Jupiter. They tell
me that he is fierce, irascible, haughty; and what slighted lover is
not revengeful? For my sake, Cleonice, for your poor father's sake,
show no scorn, no repugnance; be gentle, play with him, draw not down
the thunderbolt, even if you turn from the golden shower."

While Diagoras spoke, the girl listened with downcast eyes and flushed
cheeks, and there was an expression of such shame and sadness on her
countenance, that even the Byzantine, pausing and looking up for a
reply, was startled by it.

"My child," said he, hesitatingly and absorbed, "do not misconceive
me. Cursed be the hour when the Spartan saw thee; but since the Fates
have so served us, let us not make bad worse. I love thee, Cleonice,
more dearly than the apple of my eye; it is for _thee_ I fear, for
thee I speak. Alas! it is not dishonour I recommend, it is force I
would shun."

"Force!" said the girl, drawing up her form with sudden animation.
"Fear not that. It is not Pausanias I dread, it is--"

"What then?"

"No matter; talk of this no more. Shall I sing to thee?"

"But Pausanias will visit us this very night."

"I know it. Hark!" and with her finger to her lip, her ear bent
downward, her cheek varying from pale to red, from red to pale, the
maiden stole beyond the window to a kind of platform or terrace that
overhung the sea. There, the faint breeze stirring her long hair, and
the moonlight full upon her face, she stood, as stood that immortal
priestess who looked along the starry Hellespont for the young
Leander; and her ear had not deceived her. The oars were dashing in
the wave's below, and dark and rapid the boat bounded on towards the
rocky shore. She gazed long and steadfastly on the dim and shadowy
forms which that slender raft contained, and her eye detected amongst
the three the loftier form of her haughty wooer. Presently the thick
foliage that clothed the descent shut the boat, nearing the strand,
from her view; but she now heard below, mellowed and softened in the
still and fragrant air, the sound of the cithara and the melodious
song of the Mothon, thus imperfectly rendered from the language of
immortal melody.

  SONG.

  Carry a sword in the myrtle bough,
  Ye who would honour the tyrant-slayer;
  I, in the leaves of the myrtle bough,
  Carry a tyrant to slay myself.

  I pluck'd the branch with a hasty hand,
  But Love was lurking amidst the leaves;
  His bow is bent and his shaft is poised,
  And I must perish or pass the bough.

  Maiden, I come with a gift to thee,
  Maiden, I come with a myrtle wreath;
  Over thy forehead, or round thy breast
  Bind, I implore thee, my myrtle wreath.[21]

  From hand to hand by the banquet lights
  On with the myrtle bough passes song:
  From hand to hand by the silent stars
  What with the myrtle wreath passes? Love.

  I bear the god in a myrtle wreath,
  Under the stars let him pass to thee;
  Empty his quiver and bind his wings,
  Then pass the myrtle wreath back to me.

Cleonice listened breathlessly to the words, and sighed heavily as
they ceased. Then, as the foliage rustled below, she turned quickly
into the chamber and seated herself at a little distance from
Diagoras; to all appearance calm, indifferent and composed. Was it
nature, or the arts of Miletus, that taught the young beauty the
hereditary artifices of the sex?

"So it is he, then?" said Diagoras, with a fidgety and nervous
trepidation. "Well, he chooses strange hours to visit us. But he
is right; his visits cannot be too private. Cleonice, you look
provokingly at your ease."

Cleonice made no reply, but shifted her position so that the light
from the lamp did not fall upon her face, while her father, hurrying
to the threshold of his hall to receive his illustrious visitor, soon
re-appeared with the Spartan Regent, talking as he entered with the
volubility of one of the parasites of Alciphron and Athenaeus.

"This is most kind, most affable. Cleonice said you would come,
Pausanias, though I began to distrust you. The hours seem long to
those who expect pleasure."

"And, Cleonice, _you_ knew that I should come," said Pausanias,
approaching the fair Byzantine; but his step was timid, and there was
no pride now in his anxious eye and bended brow.

"You said you would come to-night," said Cleonice, calmly, "and
Spartans, according to proverbs, speak the truth."

"When it is to their advantage, yes,"[22]said but with respect to
others, they consider honourable whatever pleases them, and just
whatever is to their advantage."

Pausanias, with a slight curl of his lips; and, as if the girl's
compliment to his countrymen had roused his spleen and changed his
thoughts, he seated himself moodily by Cleonice, and remained silent.

The Byzantine stole an arch glance at the Spartan, as he thus sat,
from the corner of her eyes, and said, after a pause--

"You Spartans ought to speak the truth more than other people, for you
say much less. We too have our proverb at Byzantium, and one which
implies that it requires some wit to tell fibs."

"Child, child!" exclaimed Diagoras, holding up his hand reprovingly,
and directing a terrified look at the Spartan. To his great relief,
Pausanias smiled, and replied--

"Fair maiden, we Dorians are said to have a wit peculiar to ourselves,
but I confess that it is of a nature that is but little attractive to
your sex. The Athenians are blander wooers."

"Do you ever attempt to woo in Lacedaemon, then? Ah, but the maidens
there, perhaps, are not difficult to please."

"The girl puts me in a cold sweat!" muttered Diagoras, wiping his
brow. And this time Pausanias did not smile; he coloured, and answered
gravely--

"And is it, then, a vain hope for a Spartan to please a Byzantine?"

"You puzzle me. That is an enigma; put it to the oracle."

The Spartan raised his eyes towards Cleonice, and, as she saw the
inquiring, perplexed look that his features assumed, the ruby lips
broke into so wicked a smile, and the eyes that met his had so much
laughter in them, that Pausanias was fairly bewitched out of his own
displeasure.

"Ah, cruel one!" said he, lowering his voice, "I am not so proud of
being Spartan that the thought should console me for thy mockery."

"Not proud of being Spartan! say not so," exclaimed Cleonice. "Who
ever speaks of Greece and places not Sparta at her head? Who ever
speaks of freedom and forgets Thermopylae? Who ever burns for glory,
and sighs not for the fame of Pausanias and Plataea? Ah, yes, even in
jest say not that you are not proud to be a Spartan!"

"The little fool!" cried Diagoras, chuckling, and mightily delighted;
"she is quite mad about Sparta--no wonder!"

Pausanias, surprised and moved by the burst of the fair Byzantine,
gazed at her admiringly, and thought within himself how harshly the
same sentiment would have sounded on the lips of a tall Spartan
virgin; but when Cleonice heard the approving interlocution of
Diagoras, her enthusiasm vanished from her face, and putting out her
lips poutingly, she said, "Nay, father, I repeat only what others say
of the Spartans. They are admirable heroes; but from the little I have
seen, they are--"

"What?" said Pausanias eagerly, and leaning nearer to Cleonice.

"Proud, dictatorial, and stern as companions."

Pausanias once more drew back.

"There it is again!" groaned Diagoras. "I feel exactly as if I were
playing at odd and even with a lion; she does it to vex me. I shall
retaliate and creep away."

"Cleonice," said Pausanias, with suppressed emotion, "you trifle with
me, and I bear it."

"You are condescending. How would you avenge yourself?"

"How!"

"You would not beat me; you would not make me bear an anchor on the
shoulders, as they say you do your soldiers. Shame on you! _you_ bear
with me! true, what help for you?"

"Maiden," said the Spartan, rising in great anger, "for him who loves
and is slighted there is a revenge you have not mentioned."

"For him who _loves!_ No, Spartan; for him who shuns disgrace and
courts the fame dear to gods and men, there is no revenge upon women.
Blush for your threat."

"You madden, but subdue me," said the Spartan as he turned away. He
then first perceived that Diagoras had gone--that they were alone.
His contempt for the father awoke suspicion of the daughter. Again he
approached and said, "Cleonice, I know but little of the fables of
poets, yet is it an old maxim often sung and ever belied, that love
scorned becomes hate. There are moments when I think I hate thee."

"And yet thou hast never loved me," said Cleonice; and there was
something soft and tender in the tone of her voice, and the rough
Spartan was again subdued.

"I never loved thee! What, then, is love? Is not thine image always
before me?--amidst schemes, amidst perils of which thy very dreams
have never presented equal perplexity or phantoms so uncertain, I am
occupied but with thee. Surely, as upon the hyacinth is written the
exclamation of woe, so on this heart is graven thy name. Cleonice, you
who know not what it is to love, you affect to deny or to question
mine."

"And what," said Cleonice, blushing deeply, and with tears in her
eyes, "what result can come from such a love? You may not wed with
the stranger. And yet, Pausanias, yet you know that all other love
dishonours the virgin even of Byzantium. You are silent; you turn
away. Ah, do not let them wrong you. My father fears your power. If
you love me you are powerless; your power has passed to me. Is it not
so? I, a weak girl, can rule, command, irritate, mock you, if I will.
You may fly me, but not control."

"Do not tempt me too far, Cleonice," said the Spartan, with a faint
smile.

"Nay, I will be merciful henceforth, and you, Pausanias, come here
no more. Awake to the true sense of what is due to your divine
ancestry--your great name. Is it not told of you that, after the
fall of Mardonius, you nobly dismissed to her country, unscathed and
honoured, the captive Coan lady?[23] Will you reverse at Byzantium
the fame acquired at Plataea? Pausanias, spare us; appeal not to my
father's fear, still less to his love of gold."

"I cannot, I cannot fly thee," said the Spartan, with great emotion.
"You know not how stormy, how inexorable are the passions which
burst forth after a whole youth of restraint. When nature breaks the
barriers, she rushes headlong on her course. I am no gentle wooer;
where in Sparta should I learn the art? But, if I love thee not as
these mincing Ionians, who come with offerings of flowers and song,
I do love thee with all that fervour of which the old Dorian legends
tell. I could brave, like the Thracian, the dark gates of Hades, were
thy embrace my reward. Command me as thou wilt--make me thy slave in
all things, even as Hercules was to Omphale; but tell me only that I
may win thy love at last. Fear not. Why fear me? in my wildest moments
a look from thee can control me. I ask but love for love. Without thy
love thy beauty were valueless. Bid me not despair."

Cleonice turned pale, and the large tears that had gathered in her
eyes fell slowly down her cheeks; but she did not withdraw her hand
from his clasp, or avert her countenance from his eyes.

"I do not fear thee," said she, in a very low voice. "I told my father
so; but--but--" (and here she drew back her hand and averted her
face), "I fear myself."

"Ah, no, no," cried the delighted Spartan, detaining her, "do not fear
to trust to thine own heart. Talk not of dishonour. There are"
(and here the Spartan drew himself up, and his voice took a deeper
swell)--"there are those on earth who hold themselves above the
miserable judgments of the vulgar herd--who can emancipate themselves
from those galling chains of custom and of country which helotize
affection, genius, nature herself. What is dishonour here may be glory
elsewhere; and this hand, outstretched towards a mightier sceptre than
Greek ever wielded yet, may dispense, not shame and sorrow, but glory
and golden affluence to those I love."

"You amaze me, Pausanias. _Now_ I fear you. What mean these mysterious
boasts? Have you the dark ambition to restore in your own person that
race of tyrants whom your country hath helped to sweep away? Can you
hope to change the laws of Sparta, and reign there, your will the
state?"

"Cleonice, we touch upon matters that should not disturb the ears of
women. Forgive me if I have been roused from myself."

"At Miletus--so have I heard my mother say--there were women worthy to
be the confidants of men."

"But they were women who loved. Cleonice, I should rejoice in an hour
when I might pour every thought into thy bosom."

At this moment there was heard on the strand below a single note from
the Mothon's instrument, low, but prolonged; it ceased, and was again
renewed. The royal conspirator started and breathed hard.

"It is the signal," he muttered; "they wait me. Cleonice," he said
aloud, and with much earnestness in his voice, "I had hoped, ere we
parted, to have drawn from your lips those assurances which would give
me energy for the present and hope in the future. Ah, turn not from me
because my speech is plain and my manner rugged. What, Cleonice, what
if I could defy the laws of Sparta; what if, instead of that gloomy
soil, I could bear thee to lands where heaven and man alike smile
benignant on love? Might I not hope then?"

"Do nothing to sully your fame."

"Is it, then, dear to thee?"

"It is a part of thee," said Cleonice falteringly; and as if she had
said too much, she covered her face with her hands.

Emboldened by this emotion, the Spartan gave way to his passion and
his joy. He clasped her in his arms--his first embrace--and kissed,
with wild fervour, the crimsoned forehead, the veiling hands. Then,
as he tore himself away, he cast his right arm aloft.

"O Hercules!" he cried, in solemn and kindling adjuration, "my
ancestor and my divine guardian, it was not by confining thy labours
to one spot of earth, that thou wert borne from thy throne of fire to
the seats of the Gods. Like thee I will spread the influence of my
arms to nations whoso glory shall be my name; and as thy sons, my
fathers, expelled from Sparta, returned thither with sword and spear
to defeat usurpers and to found the long dynasty of the Heracleids,
even so may it be mine to visit that dread abode of torturers and
spies, and to build up in the halls of the Atridae a power worthier of
the lineage of the demigod. Again the signal! Fear not, Cleonice, I
will not tarnish my fame, but I will exchange the envy of abhorring
rivals for the obedience of a world. One kiss more! Farewell!"

Ere Cleonice recovered herself, Pausanias was gone, his wild and
uncomprehended boasts still ringing in her ear. She sighed heavily,
and turned towards the opening that admitted to the terraces. There
she stood watching for the parting of her lover's boat. It was
midnight; the air, laden with the perfumes of a thousand fragrant
shrubs and flowers that bloom along that coast in the rich luxuriance
of nature, was hushed and breathless. In its stillness every sound was
audible, the rustling of a leaf, the ripple of a wave. She heard the
murmur of whispered voices below, and in a few moments she recognised,
emerging from the foliage, the form of Pausanias; but he was not
alone. Who were his companions? In the deep lustre of that shining and
splendid atmosphere she could see sufficient of the outline of their
figures to observe that they were not dressed in the Grecian garb;
their long robes betrayed the Persian.

They seemed conversing familiarly and eagerly as they passed along the
smooth sands, till a curve in the wooded shore hid them from her view.

"Why do I love him so," said the girl mechanically, "and yet wrestle
against that love? Dark forebodings tell me that Aphrodite smiles not
on our vows. Woe is me! What be the end?"


Notes:

[19] "The Byzantine dialect was in the time of Philip, as we know from
the decree in Demosthenes, rich in Dorisms."--Mller on the Doric
Dialect.


[20] Fighting-cocks were fed with garlic, to make them more fierce.
The learned reader will remember how Theorus advised Dicaeopolis to
keep clear of the Thracians with garlic in their mouths.--See the
Acharnians of Aristoph.

[21] Garlands were twined round the neck, or placed upon the bosom
(Greek: upothumiades). See the quotations from Alcaeus, Sappho, and
Anacreon in Athenaeus, book xiii. c. 17.

[22] So said Thucydides of the Spartans, many years afterwards. "They
give evidence of honour among themselves, but with respect to others,
they consider honourable whatever pleases them, and just whatever is
to their advantage."--See Thucyd. lib. v.

[23] Herod, ix.




CHAPTER V.


On quitting Cleonice, Pausanias hastily traversed the long passage
that communicated with a square peristyle or colonnade, which again
led, on the one hand, to the more public parts of the villa, and,
on the other, through a small door left ajar, conducted by a back
entrance, to the garden and the sea-shore. Pursuing the latter path,
the Spartan bounded down the descent and came upon an opening in the
foliage, in which Lysander was seated beside the boat that had been
drawn partially on the strand.

"Alone? Where is Alcman?"

"Yonder; you heard his signal?"

"I heard it."

"Pausanias, they who seek you are Persians. Beware!"

"Of what? murder? I am warned."

"Murder to your good name. There are no arms against appearances."

"But I may trust thee?" said the Regent, quickly, "and of Alcman's
faith I am convinced."

"Why trust to any man what it were wisdom to reveal to the whole
Grecian Council? To parley secretly with the foe is half a treason to
our friends."

"Lysander," replied Pausanias, coldly, "you have much to learn before
you can be wholly Spartan. Tarry here yet awhile."

"What shall I do with this boy?" muttered the conspirator as he strode
on. "I know that he will not betray me, yet can I hope for his aid? I
love him so well that I would fain he shared my fortunes. Perhaps by
little and little I may lead him on. Meanwhile, his race and his name
are so well accredited in Sparta, his father himself an Ephor, that
his presence allays suspicion. Well, here are my Persians."

A little apart from the Mothon, who, resting his cithara on a fragment
of rock, appeared to be absorbed in reflection, stood the men of the
East. There were two of them; one of tall stature and noble presence,
in the prime of life; the other more advanced in years, of a coarser
make, a yet darker complexion, and of a sullen and gloomy countenance.
They were not dressed alike; the taller, a Persian of pure blood, wore
a short tunic that reached only to the knees: and the dress fitted to
his shape without a single fold. On his round cap or bonnet glittered
a string of those rare pearls, especially and immemorially prized in
the East, which formed the favourite and characteristic ornament of
the illustrious tribe of the Pasargadae. The other, who was a Mede,
differed scarcely in his dress from Pausanias himself, except that he
was profusely covered with ornaments; his arms were decorated with
bracelets, he wore earrings, and a broad collar of unpolished stones
in a kind of filagree was suspended from his throat. Behind the
Orientals stood Gongylus, leaning both hands on his staff, and
watching the approach of Pausanias with the same icy smile and
glittering eye with which he listened to the passionate invectives
or flattered the dark ambition of the Spartan. The Orientals saluted
Pausanias with a lofty gravity, and Gongylus drawing near, said: "Son
of Cleombrotus, the illustrious Ariamanes, kinsman to Xerxes, and of
the House of the Achaemenids, is so far versed in the Grecian tongue
that I need not proffer my offices as interpreter. In Datis, the Mede,
brother to the most renowned of the Magi, you behold a warrior worthy
to assist the arms even of Pausanias."

"I greet ye in our Spartan phrase, 'The beautiful to the good,'" said
Pausanias, regarding the Barbarians with an earnest gaze. "And I
requested Gongylus to lead ye hither in order that I might confer with
ye more at ease, than in the confinement to which I regret ye are
still sentenced. Not in prisons should be held the conversations of
brave men."

"I know," said Ariamanes (the statelier of the Barbarians), in the
Greek tongue, which he spoke intelligibly indeed, but with slowness
and hesitation, "I know that I am with that hero who refused to
dishonour the corpse of Mardonius, and even though a captive I
converse without shame with my victor."

"Rested it with me alone, your captivity should cease," replied
Pausanias. "War, that has made me acquainted with the valour of the
Persians, has also enlightened me as to their character. Your king has
ever been humane to such of the Greeks as have sought a refuge near
his throne. I would but imitate his clemency."

"Had the great Darius less esteemed the Greeks he would never have
invaded Greece. From the wanderers whom misfortune drove to his
realms, he learned to wonder at the arts, the genius, the energies of
the people of Hellas. He desired less to win their territories than
to gain such subjects. Too vast, alas, was the work he bequeathed to
Xerxes."

"He should not have trusted to force alone," returned Pausanias.
"Greece may be won, but by the arts of her sons, not by the arms
of the stranger. A Greek only can subdue Greece. By such profound
knowledge of the factions, the interests, the envies and the
jealousies of each, state as a Greek alone can possess, the mistaken
chain that binds them might be easily severed; some bought, some
intimidated, and the few that hold out subdued amidst the apathy of
the rest."

"You speak wisely, right hand of Hellas," answered the Persian, who
had listened to these remarks with deep attention. "Yet had we in our
armies your countryman, the brave Demaratus."

"But, if I have heard rightly, ye too often disdained his counsel.
Had he been listened to there had been neither a Salamis nor a
Plataea.[24] Yet Demaratus himself had been too long a stranger to
Greece, and he knew little of any state save that of Sparta. Lives he
still?"

"Surely yes, in honour and renown; little less than the son of Darius
himself."

"And what reward would Xerxes bestow on one of greater influence
than Demaratus; on one who has hitherto conquered every foe, and now
beholds before him the conquest of Greece herself?"

"If such a man were found," answered the Persian, "let his thought
run loose, let his imagination rove, let him seek only how to find a
fitting estimate of the gratitude of the king and the vastness of the
service."

Pausanias shaded his brow with his hand, and mused a few moments; then
lifting his eyes to the Persian's watchful but composed countenance,
he said, with a slight smile--

"Hard is it, O Persian, when the choice is actually before him, for a
man to renounce his country. There have been hours within this very
day when my desires swept afar from Sparta, from all Hellas, and
rested on the tranquil pomp of Oriental Satrapies. But now, rude and
stern parent though Sparta be to me, I feel still that I am her son;
and, while we speak, a throne in stormy Hellas seems the fitting
object of a Greek's ambition. In a word, then, I would rise, and yet
raise my country. I would have at my will a force that may suffice to
overthrow in Sparta its grim and unnatural laws, to found amidst its
rocks that single throne which the son of a demigod should ascend.
From that throne I would spread my empire over the whole of Greece,
Corinth and Athens being my tributaries. So that, though men now,
and posterity here-after, may say, 'Pausanias overthrew the Spartan
government,' they shall add, 'but Pausanias annexed to the Spartan
sceptre the realm of Greece. Pausanias was a tyrant, but not a
traitor.' How, O Persian, can these designs accord with the policy of
the Persian king?"

"Not without the authority of my master can I answer thee," replied
Ariamanes, "so that my answer may be as the king's signet to his
decree. But so much at least I say: that it is not the custom of the
Persians to interfere with the institutions of those states with which
they are connected. Thou desirest to make a monarchy of Greece, with
Sparta for its head. Be it so; the king my master will aid thee so to
scheme and so to reign, provided thou dost but concede to him a
vase of the water from thy fountains, a fragment of earth from thy
gardens."

"In other words," said Pausanias thoughtfully, but with a slight
colour on his brow, "if I hold my dominions tributary to the king?"

"The dominions that by the king's aid thou wilt have conquered. Is
that a hard law?"

"To a Greek and a Spartan the very mimicry of allegiance to the
foreigner is hard."

The Persian smiled. "Yet, if I understand thee aright, O Chief, even
kings in Sparta are but subjects to their people. Slave to a crowd at
home, or tributary to a throne abroad; slave every hour, or tributary
for earth and water once a year, which is the freer lot?"

"Thou canst not understand our Grecian notions," replied Pausanias,
"nor have I leisure to explain them. But though I may subdue Sparta to
myself as to its native sovereign, I will not, even by a type, subdue
the land of the Heracleid to the Barbarian."

Ariamanes looked grave; the difficulty raised was serious. And here
the craft of Gongylus interposed.

"This may be adjusted, Ariamanes, as befits both parties. Let
Pausanias rule in Sparta as he lists, and Sparta stand free of
tribute. But for all other states and cities that Pausanias, aided by
the great king, shall conquer, let the vase be filled, and the earth
be Grecian. Let him but render tribute for those lands which the
Persians submit to his sceptre. So shall the pride of the Spartan be
appeased, and the claims of the king be satisfied."

"Shall it be so?" said Pausanias.

"Instruct me so to propose to my master, and I will do my best to
content him with the exception to the wonted rights of the Persian
diadem. And then," continued Ariamanes, "then, Pausanias, Conqueror
of Mardonius, Captain at Plataea, thou art indeed a man with whom the
lord of Asia may treat as an equal. Greeks before thee have offered
to render Greece to the king my master; but they were exiles and
fugitives, they had nothing to risk or lose; thou hast fame, and
command, and power, and riches, and all----"

"But for a throne," interrupted Gongylus.

"It does not matter what may be my motives," returned the Spartan
gloomily, "and were I to tell them, you might not comprehend. But so
much by way of explanation. You too have held command?"

"I have."

"If you knew that, when power became to you so sweet that it was as
necessary to life itself as food and drink, it would then be snatched
from you for ever, and you would serve as a soldier in the very ranks
you had commanded as a leader; if you knew that no matter what your
services, your superiority, your desires, this shameful fall was
inexorably doomed, might you not see humiliation in power itself,
obscurity in renown, gloom in the present, despair in the future? And
would it not seem to you nobler even to desert the camp than to sink
into a subaltern?"

"Such a prospect has in our country made out of good subjects fierce
rebels," observed the Persian.

"Ay, ay, I doubt it not," said Pausanias, laughing bitterly. "Well,
then, such will be my lot, if I pluck not out a fairer one from the
Fatal Urn. As Regent of Sparta, while my nephew is beardless, I am
general of her armies, and I have the sway and functions of her king.
When he arrives at the customary age, I am a subject, a citizen, a
nothing, a miserable fool of memories gnawing my heart away amidst
joyless customs and stern austerities, with the recollection of the
glories of Plataea and the delights of Byzantium. Persian, I am filled
from the crown to the sole with the desire of power, with the tastes
of pleasure. I have that within me which before my time has made
heroes and traitors, raised demigods to Heaven, or chained the lofty
Titans to the rocks of Hades. Something I may yet be; I know not what.
But as the man never returns to the boy, so never, never, never once
more, can I be again the Spartan subject. Enough; such as I am, I can
fulfil what I have said to thee. Will thy king accept me as his ally,
and ratify the terms I have proposed?"

"I feel well-nigh assured of it," answered the Persian; "for since
thou hast spoken thus boldly, I will answer thee in the same strain.
Know, then, that we of the pure race of Persia, we the sons of those
who overthrew the Mede, and extended the race of the mountain tribe,
from the Scythian to the Arab, from Egypt to Ind, we at least feel
that no sacrifice were too great to redeem the disgrace we have
suffered at the hands of thy countrymen; and the world itself were too
small an empire, too confined a breathing-place for the son of
Darius, if this nook of earth were still left without the pale of his
dominion."

"This nook of earth? Ay, but Sparta itself must own no lord but me."

"It is agreed."

"If I release thee, wilt thou bear these offers to the king,
travelling day and night till thou restest at the foot of his throne?"

"I should carry tidings too grateful to suffer me to loiter by the
road."

"And Datis, he comprehends us not; but his eyes glitter fiercely on
me. It is easy to see that thy comrade loves not the Greek."

"For that reason he will aid us well. Though but a Mede, and not
admitted to the privileges of the Pasargadae, his relationship to the
most powerful and learned of our Magi, and his own services in war,
have won him such influence with both priests and soldiers, that I
would fain have him as my companion. I will answer for his fidelity to
our joint object."

"Enough; ye are both free. Gongylus, you will now conduct our friends
to the place where the steeds await them. You will then privately
return to the citadel, and give to their pretended escape the probable
appearances we devised. Be quick, while it is yet night. One word
more. Persian, our success depends upon thy speed. It is while the
Greeks are yet at Byzantium, while I yet am in command, that we should
strike the blow. If the king consent, through Gongylus thou wilt have
means to advise me. A Persian army must march at once to the Phrygian
confines, instructed to yield command to me when the hour comes to
assume it. Delay not that aid by such vast and profitless recruits
as swelled the pomp, but embarrassed the arms, of Xerxes. Armies too
large rot by their own unwieldiness into decay. A band of 50,000,
composed solely of the Medes and Persians, will more than suffice.
With such an army, if my command be undisputed, I will win a second
Plataea, but against the Greek."

"Your suggestions shall be law. May Ormuzd favour the bold!"

"Away, Gongylus. You know the rest."

Pausanias followed with thoughtful eyes the receding forms of Gongylus
and the Barbarians.

"I have passed for ever," he muttered, "the pillars of Hercules. I
must go on or perish. If I fall, I die execrated and abhorred; if I
succeed, the sound of the choral flutes will drown the hootings. Be it
as it may, I do not and will not repent. If the wolf gnaw my entrails,
none shall hear me groan." He turned and met the eyes of Alcman, fixed
on him so intently, so exultingly, that, wondering at their strange
expression, he drew back and said haughtily, "You imitate Medusa, but
I am stone already."

"Nay," said the Mothon, in a voice of great humility, "if you are of
stone, it is like the divine one which, when borne before armies,
secures their victory. Blame me not that I gazed on you with triumph
and hope. For, while you conferred with the Persian, methought the
murmurs that reached my ear sounded thus: 'When Pausanias shall rise,
Sparta shall bend low, and the Helot shall break his chains.'"

"They do not hate me, these Helots?"

"You are the only Spartan they love."

"Were my life in danger from the Ephors--"

"The Helots would rise to a man."

"Did I plant my standard on Taygetus, though all Sparta encamped
against it--"

"All the slaves would cut their way to thy side. O Pausanias, think
how much nobler it were to reign over tens of thousands who become
freemen at thy word, than to be but the equal of 10,000 tyrants."

"The Helots fight well, when well led," said Pausanias; as if to
himself. "Launch the boat."

"Pardon me, Pausanias. but is it prudent any longer to trust Lysander?
He is the pattern of the Spartan youth, and Sparta is his mistress. He
loves her too well not to blab to her every secret."

"O Sparta, Sparta, wilt thou not leave me one friend?" exclaimed
Pausanias. "No, Alcman, I will not separate myself from Lysander, till
I despair of his alliance. To your oars! be quick."

At the sound of the Mothon's tread upon the pebbles, Lysander, who had
hitherto remained motionless, reclining by the boat, rose and advanced
towards Pausanias. There was in his countenance, as the moon shining
on it cast over his statue-like features a pale and marble hue, so
much of anxiety, of affection, of fear, so much of the evident,
unmistakable solicitude of friendship, that Pausanias, who, like most
men, envied and unloved, was susceptible even of the semblance of
attachment, muttered to himself, "No, thou wilt not desert me, nor I
thee."

"My friend, my Pausanias," said Lysander, as he approached, "I have
had fears--I have seen omens. Undertake nothing, I beseech thee, which
thou hast meditated this night."

"And what hast thou seen?" said Pausanias, with a slight change of
countenance.

"I was praying the Gods for thee and Sparta, when a star shot suddenly
from the heavens. Pausanias, this is the eighth year, the year in
which on moonless nights the Ephors watch the heavens."

"And if a star fall they judge their kings," interrupted Pausanias
(with a curl of his haughty lip) "to have offended the Gods, and
suspend them from their office till acquitted by an oracle at Delphi,
or a priest at Olympia. A wise superstition. But, Lysander, the night
is not moonless, and the omen is therefore nought."

Lysander shook his head mournfully, and followed his chieftain to the
boat, in gloomy silence.


Note:

[24] After the action at Thermopylae, Demaratus advised Xerxes to send
three hundred vessels to the Laconian coast, and seize the island of
Cythera, which commanded Sparta. "The profound experience of Demaratus
in the selfish and exclusive policy of his countrymen made him argue
that if this were done the fear of Sparta for herself would prevent
her joining the forces of the rest of Greece, and leave the latter a
more easy prey to the invader."--_Athens, its Rise and Fall_. This
advice was overruled by Achaemenes. So again, had the advice of
Artemisia, the Carian princess, been taken--to delay the naval
engagement of Salamis, and rather to sail to the Peloponnesus--the
Greeks, failing of provisions and divided among themselves, would
probably have dispersed.





BOOK II.




CHAPTER I.


At noon the next day, not only the vessels in the harbour presented
the same appearance of inactivity and desertion which had
characterised the preceding evening, but the camp itself seemed
forsaken. Pausanias had quitted his ship for the citadel, in which
he took up his lodgment when on shore: and most of the officers
and sailors of the squadron were dispersed among the taverns and
wine-shops, for which, even at that day, Byzantium was celebrated.

It was in one of the lowest and most popular of these latter resorts,
and in a large and rude chamber, or rather outhouse, separated from
the rest of the building, that a number of the Laconian Helots were
assembled. Some of these were employed as sailors, others were the
military attendants on the Regent and the Spartans who accompanied
him.

At the time we speak of, these unhappy beings were in the full
excitement of that wild and melancholy gaiety which is almost peculiar
to slaves in their hours of recreation, and in which reaction of
wretchedness modern writers have discovered the indulgence of a native
humour. Some of them were drinking deep, wrangling, jesting, laughing
in loud discord over their cups. At another table rose the deep voice
of a singer, chanting one of those antique airs known but to these
degraded sons of the Homeric Achaean, and probably in its origin
going beyond the date of the Tale of Troy; a song of gross and rustic
buffoonery, but ever and anon charged with some image or thought
worthy of that language of the universal Muses. His companions
listened with a rude delight to the rough voice and homely sounds, and
now and then interrupted the wassailers at the other tables by cries
for silence, which none regarded. Here and there, with intense and
fierce anxiety on their faces, small groups were playing at dice; for
gambling is the passion of slaves. And many of these men, to whom
wealth could bring no comfort, had secretly amassed large hoards at
the plunder of Plataea, from which they had sold to the traders of
Aegina gold at the price of brass. The appearance of the rioters was
startling and melancholy. They were mostly stunted and undersized,
as are generally the progeny of the sons of woe; lean and gaunt with
early hardship, the spine of the back curved and bowed by habitual
degradation; but with the hard-knit sinews and prominent muscles which
are produced by labour and the mountain air; and under shaggy and
lowering brows sparkled many a fierce, perfidious, and malignant eye;
while as mirth, or gaming, or song, aroused smiles in the various
groups, the rude features spoke of passions easily released from the
sullen bondage of servitude, and revealed the nature of the animals
which thraldom had failed to tame. Here and there however were to be
seen forms, unlike the rest, of stately stature, of fair proportions,
wearing the divine lineaments of Grecian beauty. From some of these a
higher nature spoke out, not in mirth, that last mockery of supreme
woe, but in an expression of stern, grave, and disdainful melancholy;
others, on the contrary, surpassed the rest in vehemence, clamour,
and exuberant extravagance of emotion, as if their nobler physical
development only served to entitle them to that base superiority.
For health and vigour can make an aristocracy even among Helots. The
garments of these merrymakers increased the peculiar effect of their
general appearance. The Helots in military excursions naturally
relinquished the rough sheep-skin dress that characterised their
countrymen at home, the serfs of the soil. The sailors had thrown off,
for coolness, the leathern jerkins they habitually wore, and, with
their bare arms and breasts, looked as if of a race that yet shivered,
primitive and unredeemed, on the outskirts of civilization.

Strangely contrasted with their rougher comrades, were those who,
placed occasionally about the person of the Regent, were indulged with
the loose and clean robes of gay colours worn by the Asiatic slaves;
and these ever and anon glanced at their finery with an air of
conscious triumph. Altogether, it was a sight that might well have
appalled, by its solemn lessons of human change, the poet who would
have beheld in that embruted flock the descendants of the race over
whom Pelops and Atreus, and Menelaus, and Agamemnon the king of men,
had held their antique sway, and might still more have saddened the
philosopher who believed, as Menander has nobly written, 'That Nature
knows no slaves.'

Suddenly, in the midst of the confused and uproarious hubbub, the door
opened, and Alcman the Mothon entered the chamber. At this sight the
clamour ceased in an instant. The party rose, as by a general impulse,
and crowded round the new comer.

"My friends," said he, regarding them with the same calm and frigid
indifference which usually characterised his demeanour, "you do well
to make merry while you may, for something tells me it will not last
long. We shall return to Lacedaemon. You look black. So, then, is
there no delight in the thought of home?"

"_Home!_" muttered one of the Helots, and the word, sounding drearily
on his lips, was echoed by many, so that it circled like a groan.

"Yet ye have your children as much as if ye were free," said Alcman.

"And for that reason it pains us to see them play, unaware of the
future," said a Helot of better mien than his comrades.

"But do you know," returned the Mothon, gazing on the last speaker
steadily, "that for your children there may not be a future fairer
than that which your fathers knew?"

"Tush!" exclaimed one of the unhappy men, old before his time, and
of an aspect singularly sullen and ferocious. "Such have been your
half-hints and mystic prophecies for years. What good comes of them?
Was there ever an oracle for Helots?"

"There was no repute in the oracles even of Apollo," returned Alcman,
"till the Apollo-serving Dorians became conquerors. Oracles are the
children of victories."

"But there are no victories for us," said the first speaker
mournfully.

"Never, if ye despair," said the Mothon loftily. "What," he added
after a pause, looking round at the crowd, "what, do ye not see that
hope dawned upon us from the hour when thirty-five thousand of us were
admitted as soldiers, ay, and as conquerors, at Plataea? From that
moment we knew our strength. Listen to me. At Samos once a thousand
slaves--mark me, but a thousand,--escaped the yoke--seized on arms,
fled to the mountains (we have mountains even in Laconia), descended
from time to time to devastate the fields and to harass their
ancient lords. By habit they learned war, by desperation they grew
indomitable. What became of these slaves? were they cut off? Did they
perish by hunger, by the sword, in the dungeon or field? No; those
brave men were the founders of Ephesus."[25]

"But the Samians were not Spartans," mumbled the old Helot.

"As ye will, as ye will," said Alcman, relapsing into his usual
coldness. "I wish you never to strike unless ye are prepared to die or
conquer."

"Some of us are," said the younger Helot.

"Sacrifice a cock to the Fates, then."

"But why, think you," asked one of the Helots, "that we shall be so
soon summoned back to Laconia?"

"Because while ye are drinking and idling here--drones that ye
are--there is commotion in the Athenian bee-hive yonder. Know that
Ariamanes the Persian and Datis the Mede have escaped. The allies,
especially the Athenians, are excited and angry; and many of them are
already come in a body to Pausanias, whom they accuse of abetting the
escape of the fugitives."

"Well?"

"Well, and if Pausanias does not give honey in his words,--and few
flowers grow on his lips--the bees will sting, that is all. A trireme
will be despatched to Sparta with complaints. Pausanias will be
recalled--perhaps his life endangered."

"Endangered!" echoed several voices.

"Yes. What is that to you--what care you for his danger? He is a
Spartan."

"Ay," cried one; "but he has been kind to the Helots."

"And we have fought by his side," said another.

"And he dressed my wound with his own hand," murmured a third.

"And we have got money under him," growled a fourth.

"And more than all," said Alcman, in a loud voice, "if he lives, he
will break down the Spartan government. Ye will not let this man die?"

"Never!" exclaimed the whole assembly. Alcman gazed with a kind of
calm and strange contempt on the flashing eyes, the fiery gestures of
the throng, and then said, coldly,

"So then ye would fight for one man?"

"Ay, ay, that would we."

"But not for your own liberties, and those of your children unborn?"

There was a dead silence; but the taunt was felt, and its logic was
already at work in many of these rugged breasts.

At this moment, the door was suddenly thrown open; and a Helot, in the
dress worn by the attendants of the Regent, entered, breathless and
panting.

"Alcman! the gods be praised you are here. Pausanias commands your
presence. Lose not a moment. And you too, comrades, by Demeter, do you
mean to spend whole days at your cups? Come to the citadel; ye may be
wanted."

This was spoken to such of the Helots as belonged to the train of
Pausanias.

"Wanted--what for?" said one. "Pausanias gives us a holiday while he
employs the sleek Egyptians."

"Who that serves Pausanias ever asks that question, or can foresee
from one hour to another what he may be required to do?" returned the
self-important messenger, with great contempt.

Meanwhile the Mothon, all whose movements were peculiarly silent and
rapid, was already on his way to the citadel. The distance was not
inconsiderable, but Alcman was swift of foot. Tightening the girdle
round his waist, he swung himself, as it were, into a kind of run,
which, though not seemingly rapid, cleared the ground with a speed
almost rivalling that of the ostrich, from the length of the stride
and the extreme regularity of the pace. Such was at that day the
method by which messages were despatched from state to state,
especially in mountainous countries; and the length of way which was
performed, without stopping, by the foot-couriers might startle the
best-trained pedestrians in our times. So swiftly indeed did the
Mothon pursue his course, that just by the citadel he came up with the
Grecian captains who, before he joined the Helots, had set off for
their audience with Pausanias. There were some fourteen or fifteen
of them, and they so filled up the path, which, just there, was not
broad, that Alcman was obliged to pause as he came upon their rear.

"And whither so fast, fellow?" said Uliades the Samian, turning round
as he heard the strides of the Mothon.

"Please you, master, I am bound to the General."

"Oh, his slave! Is he going to free you?"

"I am already as free as a man who has no city can be."

"Pithy. The Spartan slaves have the dryness of their masters. How,
sirrah! do you jostle me?"

"I crave pardon. I only seek to pass."

"Never! to take precedence of a Samian. Keep back."

"I dare not."

"Nay, nay, let him pass," said the young Chian, Antagoras; "he will
get scourged if he is too late. Perhaps, like the Persians, Pausanias
wears false hair, and wishes the slave to dress it in honour of us."
"Hush!" whispered an Athenian. "Are these taunts prudent?"

Here there suddenly broke forth a loud oath from Uliades, who,
lingering a little behind the rest, had laid rough hands on the
Mothon, as the latter once more attempted to pass him. With a
dexterous and abrupt agility, Alcman had extricated himself from the
Samian's grasp, but with a force that swung the captain on his knee.
Taking advantage of the position of the foe, the Mothon darted onward,
and threading the rest of the party, disappeared through the
neighbouring gates of the citadel.

"You saw the insult?" said Uliades between his ground teeth as he
recovered himself. "The master shall answer for the slave; and to me,
too, who have forty slaves of my own at home!"

"Pooh! think no more of it," said Antagoras gaily; "the poor fellow
meant only to save his own hide."

"As if that were of any consequence! my slaves are brought up from the
cradle not to know if they have hides or not. You may pinch them by
the hour together and they don't feel you. My little ones do it, in
rainy weather, to strengthen their fingers. The Gods keep them!"

"An excellent gymnastic invention. But we are now within the citadel.
Courage! the Spartan greyhound has long teeth."

Pausanias was striding with hasty steps up and down a long and narrow
peristyle or colonnade that surrounded the apartments appropriated to
his private use, when Alcman joined him.

"Well, well," cried he, eagerly, as he saw the Mothon, "you have
mingled with the common gangs of these worshipful seamen, these new
men, these Ionians. Think you they have so far overcome their awe
of the Spartan that they would obey the mutinous commands of their
officers?"

"Pausanias, the truth must be spoken--Yes!"

"Ye Gods! one would think each of these wranglers imagined he had a
whole Persian army in his boat. Why, I have seen the day when, if in
any assembly of Greeks a Spartan entered, the sight of his very hat
and walking-staff cast a terror through the whole conclave." "True,
Pausanias; but they suspect that Sparta herself will disown her
General."

"Ah! say they so?"

"With one voice."

Pausanias paused a moment in deep and perturbed thought.

"Have they dared yet, think you, to send to Sparta?"

"I hear not; but a trireme is in readiness to sail after your
conference with the captains."

"So, Alcman, it were ruin to my schemes to be
recalled--until--until--"

"The hour to join the Persians on the frontier--yes."

"One word more. Have you had occasion to sound the Helots?"

"But half an hour since. They will be true to you. Lift your right
hand, and the ground where you stand will bristle with men who fear
death even less than the Spartans."

"Their aid were useless here against the whole Grecian fleet; but in
the defiles of Laconia, otherwise. I am prepared then for the worst,
even recall."

Here a slave crossed from a kind of passage that led from the outer
chambers into the peristyle.

"The Grecian captains have arrived to demand audience."

"Bid them wait," cried Pausanias, passionately.

"Hist! Pausanias," whispered the Mothon. "Is it not best to soothe
them--to play with them--to cover the lion with the fox's hide?"

The Regent turned with a frown to his foster-brother, as if surprised
and irritated by his presumption in advising; and indeed of late,
since Pausanias had admitted the son of the Helot into his guilty
intrigues, Alcman had assumed a bearing and tone of equality which
Pausanias, wrapped in his dark schemes, did not always notice, but at
which from time to time he chafed angrily, yet again permitted it,
and the custom gained ground; for in guilt conventional distinctions
rapidly vanish, and mind speaks freely out to mind. The presence of
the slave, however, restrained him, and after a momentary silence his
natural acuteness, great when undisturbed by passion or pride, made
him sensible of the wisdom of Alcman's counsel.

"Hold!" he said to the slave. "Announce to the Grecian Chiefs that
Pausanias will await them forthwith. Begone. Now, Alcman, I will
talk over these gentle monitors. Not in vain have I been educated in
Sparta; yet if by chance I fail, hold thyself ready to haste to Sparta
at a minute's warning. I must forestall the foe. I have gold, gold;
and he who employs most of the yellow orators, will prevail most with
the Ephors. Give me my staff; and tarry in yon chamber to the left."


Note:

[25] Malacus ap. Athen. 6.




CHAPTER II


In a large hall, with a marble fountain in the middle of it, the
Greek captains awaited the coming of Pausanias. A low and muttered
conversation was carried on amongst them, in small knots and groups,
amidst which the voice of Uliades was heard the loudest. Suddenly the
hum was hushed, for footsteps were heard without. The thick curtains
that at one extreme screened the door-way were drawn aside, and,
attended by three of the Spartan knights, amongst whom was Lysander,
and by two soothsayers, who were seldom absent, in war or warlike
council, from the side of the Royal Heracleid, Pausanias slowly
entered the hall. So majestic, grave, and self-collected were the
bearing and aspect of the Spartan general, that the hereditary awe
inspired by his race was once more awakened, and the angry crowd
saluted him, silent and half-abashed. Although the strong passions,
and the daring arrogance of Pausanias, did not allow him the exercise
of that enduring, systematic, unsleeping hypocrisy which, in relations
with the foreigner, often characterised his countrymen, and which,
from its outward dignity and profound craft, exalted the vice into
genius; yet trained from earliest childhood in the arts that hide
design, that control the countenance, and convey in the fewest words
the most ambiguous meanings, the Spartan general could, for a brief
period, or for a critical purpose, command all the wiles for which the
Greek was nationally famous, and in which Thucydides believed that,
of all Greeks, the Spartan was the most skilful adept. And now, as,
uniting the courtesy of the host with the dignity of the chief, he
returned the salute of the officers, and smiled his gracious welcome,
the unwonted affability of his manner took the discontented by
surprise, and half propitiated the most indignant in his favour.

"I need not ask you, O Greeks," said he, "why ye have sought me.
Ye have learnt the escape of Ariamanes and Datis--a strange and
unaccountable mischance."

The captains looked round at each other in silence, till at last every
eye rested upon Cimon, whose illustrious birth, as well as his known
respect for Sparta, combined with his equally well-known dislike of
her chief, seemed to mark him, despite his youth, as the fittest
person to be speaker for the rest. Cimon, who understood the mute
appeal, and whose courage never failed his ambition, raised his head,
and, after a moment's hesitation, replied to the Spartan:

"Pausanias, you guess rightly the cause which leads us to your
presence. These prisoners were our noblest; their capture the reward
of our common valour; they were generals, moreover, of high skill and
repute. They had become experienced in our Grecian warfare, even by
their defeats. Those two men, should Xerxes again invade Greece, are
worth more to his service than half the nations whose myriads crossed
the Hellespont. But this is not all. The arms of the Barbarians we can
encounter undismayed. It is treason at home which can alone appal us."

There was a low murmur among the Ionians at these words. Pausanias,
with well-dissembled surprise on his countenance, turned his eyes from
Cimon to the murmurers, and from them again to Cimon, and repeated:

"Treason! son of Miltiades; and from whom?"

"Such is the question that we would put to thee, Pausanias--to thee,
whose eyes, as leader of our armies, are doubtless vigilant daily and
nightly over the interests of Greece."

"I am not blind," returned Pausanias, appearing unconscious of the
irony; "but I am not Argus. If thou hast discovered aught that is
hidden from me, speak boldly."

"Thou hast made Gongylus, the Eretrian, governor of Byzantium; for
what great services we know not. But he has lived much in Persia."

"For that reason, on this the frontier of her domains, he is better
enabled to penetrate her designs and counteract her ambition."

"This Gongylus," continued Cimon, "is well known to have much
frequented the Persian captives in their confinement."

"In order to learn from them what may yet be the strength of the king.
In this he had my commands."

"I question it not. But, Pausanias," continued Cimon, raising his
voice, and with energy, "had he also thy commands to leave thy galley
last night, and to return to the citadel?"

"He had. What then?"

"And on his return the Persians disappear--a singular chance, truly.
But that is not all. Last night, before he returned to the citadel,
Gongylus was perceived, alone, in a retired spot on the outskirts of
the city."

"Alone?" echoed Pausanias.

"Alone. If he had companions they were not discerned. This spot was
out of the path he should have taken. By this spot, on the soft soil,
are the marks of hoofs, and in the thicket close by were found these
witnesses," and Cimon drew from his vest a handful of the pearls, only
worn by the Eastern captives.

"There is something in this," said Xanthippus, "which requires at
least examination. May it please you, Pausanias, to summon Gongylus
hither?"

A momentary shade passed over the brow of the conspirator, but the
eyes of the Greeks were on him; and to refuse were as dangerous as to
comply. He turned to one of his Spartans, and ordered him to summon
the Eretrian.

"You have spoken well, Xanthippus. This matter must be sifted."

"With that, motioning the captains to the seats that were ranged round
the walls and before a long table, he cast himself into a large chair
at the head of the table, and waited in silent anxiety the entrance of
the Eretrian. His whole trust now was in the craft and penetration of
his friend. If the courage or the cunning of Gongylus failed him--if
but a word betrayed him--Pausanias was lost. He was girt by men who
hated him; and he read in the dark fierce eyes of the Ionians--whose
pride he had so often galled, whose revenge he had so carelessly
provoked--the certainty of ruin. One hand hidden within the folds of
his robe convulsively clinched the flesh, in the stern agony of his
suspense. His calm and composed face nevertheless exhibited to the
captains no trace of fear.

The draperies were again drawn aside, and Gongylus slowly entered.

Habituated to peril of every kind from his earliest youth, the
Eretrian was quick to detect its presence. The sight of the silent
Greeks, formally seated round the hall, and watching his steps and
countenance with eyes whose jealous and vindictive meaning it required
no Oedipus to read, the grave and half-averted brow of Pausanias, and
the angry excitement that had prevailed amidst the host at the news of
the escape of the Persians--all sufficed to apprise him of the nature
of the council to which he had been summoned.

Supporting himself on his staff, and dragging his limbs tardily along,
he had leisure to examine, though with apparent indifference, the
whole group; and when, with a calm salutation, he arrested his steps
at the foot of the table immediately facing Pausanias, he darted
one glance at the Spartan so fearless, so bright, so cheering, that
Pausanias breathed hard, as if a load were thrown from his breast, and
turning easily towards Cimon, said--

"Behold your witness. Which of us shall be questioner, and which
judge?"

"That matters but little," returned Cimon. "Before this audience
justice must force its way."

"It rests with you, Pausanias," said Xanthippus, "to acquaint the
governor of Byzantium with the suspicions he has excited."

"Gongylus," said Pausanias, "the captive Barbarians, Ariamanes and
Datis, were placed by me especially under thy vigilance and guard.
Thou knowest that, while (for humanity becomes the victor) I ordered
thee to vex them by no undue restraints, I nevertheless commanded thee
to consider thy life itself answerable for their durance. They have
escaped. The captains of Greece demand of thee, as I demanded--by what
means--by what connivance? Speak the truth, and deem that in falsehood
as well as in treachery, detection is easy, and death certain."

The tone of Pausanias, and his severe look, pleased and re-assured all
the Greeks, except the wiser Cimon. who, though his suspicions were a
little shaken, continued to fix his eyes rather on Pausanias than on
the Eretrian.

"Pausanias," replied Gongylus, drawing up his lean frame, as with the
dignity of conscious innocence, "that suspicion could fall upon me, I
find it difficult to suppose. Raised by thy favour to the command
of Byzantium, what have I to gain by treason or neglect? These
Persians--I knew them well. I had known them in Susa--known them
when I served Darius, being then an exile from Eretria. Ye know, my
countrymen, that when Darius invaded Greece I left his court and
armies, and sought my native land, to fall or to conquer in its cause.
Well, then, I knew these Barbarians. I sought them frequently; partly,
it may be, to return to them in their adversity the courtesies shown
me in mine. Ye are Greeks; ye will not condemn me for humanity and
gratitude. Partly with another motive. I knew that Ariamanes had the
greatest influence over Xerxes. I knew that the great king would
at any cost seek to regain the liberty of his friend. I urged upon
Ariamanes the wisdom of a peace with the Greeks even on their
own terms. I told him that when Xerxes sent to offer the ransom,
conditions of peace would avail more than sacks of gold. He listened
and approved. Did I wrong in this, Pausanias? No; for thou, whose deep
sagacity has made thee condescend even to appear half Persian, because
thou art all Greek--thou thyself didst sanction my efforts on behalf
of Greece."

Pausanias looked with a silent triumph round the conclave, and
Xanthippus nodded approval.

"In order to conciliate them, and with too great confidence in their
faith, I relaxed by degrees the rigour of their confinement; that was
a fault, I own it. Their apartments communicated with a court in which
I suffered them to walk at will. But I placed there two sentinels in
whom I deemed I could repose all trust--not my own countrymen--not
Eretrians--not thy Spartans or Laconians, Pausanias. No; I deemed that
if ever the jealousy (a laudable jealousy) of the Greeks should demand
an account of my faith and vigilance, my witnesses should be the
countrymen of those who have ever the most suspected me. Those
sentinels were, the one a Samian, the other a Plataean. These men
have betrayed me and Greece. Last night, on returning hither from the
vessel, I visited the Persians. They were about to retire to rest, and
I quitted them soon, suspecting nothing. This morning they had fled,
and with them their abetters, the sentinels. I hastened first to send
soldiers in search of them; and, secondly, to inform Pausanias in his
galley. If I have erred, I submit me to your punishment. Punish my
error, but acquit my honesty."

"And what," said Cimon, abruptly, "led thee far from thy path, between
the Heracleid's galley and the citadel, to the fields near the temple
of Aphrodite, between the citadel and the bay? Thy colour changes.
Mark him, Greeks. Quick; thine answer."

The countenance of Gongylus had indeed lost its colour and hardihood.
The loud tone of Cimon--the effect his confusion produced on the
Greeks, some of whom, the Ionians less self-possessed and dignified
than the rest, half rose, with fierce gestures and muttered
exclamations--served still more to embarrass and intimidate him. He
cast a hasty look on Pausanias, who averted his eyes. There was a
pause. The Spartan gave himself up for lost; but how much more was
his fear increased when Gongylus, casting an imploring gaze upon the
Greeks, said hesitatingly--

"Question me no farther. I dare not speak;" and as he spoke he pointed
to Pausanias.

"It was the dread of thy resentment, Pausanias," said Cimon coldly,
"that withheld his confession. Vouchsafe to re-assure him."

"Eretrian," said Pausanias, striking his clenched hand on the table,
"I know not what tale trembles on thy lips; but, be it what it may,
give it voice, I command thee." "Thou thyself, thou wert the cause
that led me towards the temple of Aphrodite," said Gongylus, in a low
voice.

At these words there went forth a general deep-breathed murmur. With
one accord every Greek rose to his feet. The Spartan attendants in the
rear of Pausanias drew closer to his person; but there was nothing
in their faces--yet more dark and vindictive than those of the other
Greeks--that promised protection. Pausanias alone remained seated and
unmoved. His imminent danger gave him back all his valour, all his
pride, all his passionate and profound disdain. With unbleached cheek,
with haughty eyes, he met the gaze of the assembly; and then waving
his hand as if that gesture sufficed to restrain and awe them, he
said--

"In the name of all Greece, whose chief I yet am, whose protector I
have once been, I command ye to resume your seats, and listen to the
Eretrian. Spartans, fall back. Governor of Byzantium, pursue your
tale."

"Yes, Pausanias," resumed Gongylus, "you alone were the cause that
drew me from my rest. I would fain be silent, but----"

"Say on," cried Pausanias fiercely, and measuring the space between
himself and Gongylus, in doubt whether the Eretrian's head were within
reach of his scimitar; so at least Gongylus interpreted that freezing
look of despair and vengeance, and he drew back some paces. "I place
myself, O Greeks, under your protection; it is dangerous to reveal the
errors of the great. Know that, as Governor of Byzantium, many things
ye wot not of reach my ears. Hence, I guard against dangers while ye
sleep. Learn, then, that Pausanias is not without the weakness of his
ancestor, Alcides; he loves a maiden--a Byzantine--Cleonice, the
daughter of Diagoras."

This unexpected announcement, made in so grave a tone, provoked a
smile amongst the gay Ionians; but an exclamation of jealous anger
broke from Antagoras, and a blush partly of wounded pride, partly of
warlike shame, crimsoned the swarthy cheek of Pausanias. Cimon, who
was by no means free from the joyous infirmities of youth, relaxed his
severe brow, and said, after a short pause--

"Is it, then, among the grave duties of the Governor of Byzantium to
watch over the fair Cleonice, or to aid the suit of her illustrious
lover?"

"Not so," answered Gongylus; "but the life of the Grecian general is
dear, at least, to the grateful Governor of Byzantium. Greeks, ye know
that amongst you Pausanias has many foes. Returning last night from
his presence, and passing through the thicket, I overheard voices at
hand. I caught the name of Pausanias. 'The Spartan,' said one voice,
'nightly visits the house of Diagoras. He goes usually alone. From the
height near the temple we can watch well, for the night is clear;
if he goes alone, we can intercept his way on his return.' 'To the
height!' cried the other. I thought to distinguish the voices, but the
trees hid the speakers. I followed the footsteps towards the temple,
for it behoved me to learn who thus menaced the chief of Greece. But
ye know that the wood reaches even to the sacred building, and the
steps gained the temple before I could recognize the men. I
concealed myself, as I thought, to watch; but it seems that I was
perceived, for he who saw me, and now accuses, was doubtless one of
the assassins. Happy I, if the sight of a witness scared him from the
crime. Either fearing detection, or aware that their intent that night
was frustrated--for Pausanias, visiting Cleonice earlier than his
wont, had already resought his galley--the men retreated as they
came, unseen, not unheard. I caught their receding steps through the
brushwood. Greeks, I have said. Who is my accuser? in him behold the
would-be murderer of Pausanias!"

"Liar," cried an indignant and loud voice amongst the captains, and
Antagoras stood forth from the circle.

"It is I who saw thee. Darest thou accuse Antagoras of Chios?"

"What at that hour brought Antagoras of Chios to the temple of
Aphrodite?" retorted Gongylus.

The eyes of the Greeks turned toward the young captain, and there
was confusion on his face. But recovering himself quickly, the Chian
answered, "Why should I blush to own it? Aphrodite is no dishonourable
deity to the men of the Ionian Isles. I sought the temple at that
hour, as is our wont, to make my offering, and record my prayer."

"Certainly," said Cimon. "We must own that Aphrodite is powerful at
Byzantium. Who can acquit Pausanias and blame Antagoras?"

"Pardon me--one question," said Gongylus. "Is not the female heart
which Antagoras would beseech the goddess to soften towards him that
of the Cleonice of whom we spoke? See, he denies it not. Greeks, the
Chians are warm lovers, and warm lovers are revengeful rivals."

This artful speech had its instantaneous effect amongst the younger
and more unthinking loiterers. Those who at once would have
disbelieved the imputed guilt of Antagoras upon motives merely
political, inclined to a suggestion that ascribed it to the jealousy
of a lover. And his character, ardent and fiery, rendered the
suspicion yet more plausible. Meanwhile the minds of the audience had
been craftily drawn from the grave and main object of the meeting--the
flight of the Persians--and a lighter and livelier curiosity had
supplanted the eager and dark resentment which had hitherto animated
the circle. Pausanias, with the subtle genius that belonged to him,
hastened to seize advantage of this momentary diversion in his favour,
and before the Chian could recover his consternation, both at the
charge and the evident effect it had produced upon a part of the
assembly, the Spartan stretched his hand, and spake.

"Greeks, Pausanias listens to no tale of danger to himself. Willingly
he believes that Gongylus either misinterpreted the intent of some
jealous and heated threats, or that the words he overheard were not
uttered by Antagoras. Possible is it, too, that others may have sought
the temple with less gentle desires than our Chian ally. Let this
pass. Unworthy such matters of the councils of bearded men; too much
reference has been made to those follies which our idleness has
given birth to. Let no fair Briseis renew strife amongst chiefs and
soldiers. Excuse not thyself, Antagoras; we dismiss all charge against
thee. On the other hand, Gongylus will doubtless seem to you to have
accounted for his appearance near the precincts of the temple. And
it is but a coincidence, natural enough, that the Persian prisoners
should have chosen, later in the night, the same spot for the steeds
to await them. The thickness of the wood round the temple, and the
direction of the place towards the east, points out the neighbourhood
as the very one in which the fugitives would appoint the horses. Waste
no further time, but provide at once for the pursuit. To you, Cimon,
be this care confided. Already have I despatched fifty light-armed men
on fleet Thessalian steeds. You, Cimon, increase the number of the
pursuers. The prisoners may be yet recaptured. Doth aught else remain
worthy of our ears? If so, speak; if not, depart."

"Pausanias," said Antagoras, firmly, "let Gongylus retract, or not,
his charge against me, I retain mine against Gongylus. Wholly false
is it that in word or deed I plotted violence against thee, though of
much--not as Cleonice's lover, but as Grecian captain--I have good
reason to complain. Wholly false is it that I had a comrade. I was
alone. And coming out from the temple, where I had hung my chaplet,
I perceived Gongylus clearly under the starlit skies. He stood in
listening attitude close by the sacred myrtle grove. I hastened
towards him, but methinks he saw me not; he turned slowly, penetrated
the wood, and vanished. I gained the spot on the soft sward which the
dropping boughs make ever humid. I saw the print of hoofs. Within the
thicket I found the pearls that Cimon has displayed to you. Clear,
then, is it that this man lies--clear that the Persians must have fled
already--although Gongylus declares that on his return to the citadel
he visited them in their prison. Explain this, Eretrian!"

"He who would speak false witness," answered Gongylus, with a firmness
equal to the Chian's, "can find pearls at whatsoever hour he pleases.
Greeks, this man presses me to renew the charge which Pausanias
generously sought to stifle. I have said. And I, Governor of
Byzantium, call on the Council of the Grecian Leaders to maintain my
authority, and protect their own Chief."

Then arose a vexed and perturbed murmur, most of the Ionians siding
with Antagoras, such of the allies as yet clung to the Dorian
ascendancy grouping round Gongylus. The persistence of Antagoras had
made the dilemma of no slight embarrassment to Pausanias. Something
lofty in his original nature urged him to shrink from supporting
Gongylus in an accusation which he believed untrue. On the other hand,
he could not abandon his accomplice in an effort, as dangerous as it
was crafty, to conceal their common guilt.

"Son of Miltiades," he said after a brief pause, in which his
dexterous resolution was formed, "I invoke your aid to appease a
contest in which I foresee no result but that of schism amongst
ourselves. Antagoras has no witness to support his tale, Gongylus none
to support his own. Who shall decide between conflicting testimonies
which rest but on the lips of accuser and accused? Hereafter, if the
matter be deemed sufficiently grave, let us refer the decision to the
oracle that never errs. Time and chance meanwhile may favour us in
clearing up the darkness we cannot now penetrate.

For you, Governor of Byzantium, it behoves me to say that the escape
of prisoners entrusted to your charge justifies vigilance if not
suspicion. We shall consult at our leisure whether or not that course
suffices to remove you from the government of Byzantium. Heralds,
advance; our council is dissolved."

With these words Pausanias rose, and the majesty of his bearing, with
the unwonted temper and conciliation of his language, so came in aid
of his high office, that no man ventured a dissentient murmur.

The conclave broke up, and not till its members had gained the outer
air did any signs of suspicion or dissatisfaction evince themselves;
but then, gathering in groups, the Ionians with especial jealousy
discussed what had passed, and with their native shrewdness ascribed
the moderation of Pausanias to his desire to screen Gongylus and avoid
further inquisition into the flight of the prisoners. The discontented
looked round for Cimon, but the young Athenian had hastily retired
from the throng, and, after issuing orders to pursue the fugitives,
sought Aristides in the house near the quay in which he lodged.

Cimon related to his friend what had passed at the meeting, and
terminating his recital, said:

"Thou shouldst have been with us. With thee we might have ventured
more." "And if so," returned the wise Athenian with a smile, "ye would
have prospered less Precisely because I would not commit our country
to the suspicion of fomenting intrigues and mutiny to her own
advantage, did I abstain from the assembly, well aware that Pausanias
would bring his minion harmless from the unsupported accusation of
Antagoras. Thou hast acted with cool judgment, Cimon. The Spartan is
weaving the webs of the Parcae for his own feet. Leave him to weave
on, undisturbed. The hour in which Athens shall assume the sovereignty
of the seas is drawing near. Let it come, like Jove's thunder, in a
calm sky."




CHAPTER III.


Pausanias did not that night quit the city. After the meeting, he held
a private conference with the Spartan Equals, whom custom and the
government assigned, in appearance as his attendants, in reality as
witnesses if not spies of his conduct. Though every pure Spartan, as
compared with the subject Laconian population, was noble, the republic
acknowledged two main distinctions in class, the higher, entitled
Equals, a word which we might not inaptly and more intelligibly render
Peers; the lower, Inferiors. These distinctions, though hereditary,
were not immutable. The peer could be degraded, the inferior could
become a peer. To the royal person in war three peers were allotted.
Those assigned to Pausanias, of the tribe called the Hylleans, were
naturally of a rank and influence that constrained him to treat them
with a certain deference, which perpetually chafed his pride and
confirmed his discontent; for these three men were precisely of
the mould which at heart he most despised. Polydorus, the first in
rank--for, like Pausanias, he boasted his descent from Hercules--was
the personification of the rudeness and bigotry of a Spartan who had
never before stirred from his rocky home, and who disdained all that
he could not comprehend. Gelon, the second, passed for a very wise
man, for he seldom spoke but in monosyllables; yet, probably, his
words were as numerous as his ideas. Cleomenes, the third, was as
distasteful to the Regent from his merits as the others from their
deficiencies. He had risen from the grade of the Inferiors by his
valour; blunt, homely, frank, sincere, he never disguised his
displeasure at the manner of Pausanias, though, a true Spartan
in discipline, he never transgressed the respect which his chief
commanded in time of war.

Pausanias knew that these officers were in correspondence with Sparta,
and he now exerted all his powers to remove from their minds any
suspicion which the disappearance of the prisoners might have left in
them.

In this interview he displayed all those great natural powers which,
rightly trained and guided, might have made him not less great in
council than in war. With masterly precision he enlarged on the
growing ambition of Athens, on the disposition in her favour evinced
by all the Ionian confederates. "Hitherto," he said truly, "Sparta has
uniformly held rank as the first state of Greece; the leadership of
the Greeks belongs to us by birth and renown. But see you not that the
war is now shifting from land to sea? Sea is not our element; it is
that of Athens, of all the Ionian race. If this continue we lose our
ascendancy, and Athens becomes the sovereign of Hellas. Beneath the
calm of Aristides I detect his deep design. In vain Cimon affects the
manner of the Spartan; at heart he is Athenian. This charge against
Gongylus is aimed at me. Grant that the plot which it conceals
succeed; grant that Sparta share the affected suspicions of the
Ionians, and recall me from Byzantium; deem you that there lives one
Spartan who could delay for a day the supremacy of Athens? Nought
save the respect the Dorian Greeks at least attach to the General
at Plataea could restrain the secret ambition of the city of the
demagogues. Deem not that I have been as rash and vain as some hold me
for the stern visage I have shown to the Ionians. Trust me that it was
necessary to awe them, with a view to maintain our majesty. For Sparta
to preserve her ascendancy, two things are needful: first, to continue
the war by land; secondly, to disgust the Ionians with their sojourn
here, send them with their ships to their own havens, and so leave
Hellas under the sole guardianship of ourselves and our Peloponnesian
allies. Therefore I say, bear with me in this double design; chide me
not if my haughty manner disperse these subtle Ionians. If I bore with
them to-day it was less from respect than, shall I say it, my fear
lest you should misinterpret me. Beware how you detail to Sparta
whatever might rouse the jealousy of her government. Trust to me,
and I will extend the dominion of Sparta till it grasp the whole
of Greece. We will depose everywhere the revolutionary Demos, and
establish our own oligarchies in every Grecian state. We will Laconize
all Hellas."

Much of what Pausanias said was wise and profound. Such statesmanship,
narrow and congenial, but vigorous and crafty, Sparta taught in later
years to her alert politicians. And we have already seen that, despite
the dazzling prospects of Oriental dominion, he as yet had separated
himself rather from the laws than the interests of Sparta, and still
incorporated his own ambition with the extension of the sovereignty of
his country over the rest of Greece.

But the peers heard him in dull and gloomy silence; and, not till he
had paused and thrice asked for a reply, did Polydorus speak.

"You would increase the dominion of Sparta, Pausanias. Increase of
dominion is waste of life and treasure. We have few men, little gold;
Sparta is content to hold her own." "Good," said Gelon, with impassive
countenance. "What care we who leads the Greeks into blows? the fewer
blows the better. Brave men fight if they must, wise men never fight
if they can help it."

"And such is your counsel, Cleomenes?" asked Pausanias, with a
quivering lip.

"Not from the same reasons," answered the nobler and more generous
Spartan. "I presume not to question your motives, Pausanias. I leave
you to explain them to the Ephors and the Gerusia. But since you press
me, this I say. First, all the Greeks, Ionian as well as Dorian,
fought equally against the Mede, and from the commander of the Greeks
all should receive fellowship and courtesy. Secondly, I say if Athens
is better fitted than Sparta for the maritime ascendancy, let Athens
rule, so that Hellas be saved from the Mede. Thirdly, O Pausanias, I
pray that Sparta may rest satisfied with her own institutions, and
not disturb the peace of Greece by forcing them upon other States and
thereby enslaving Hellas. What more could the Persian do? Finally,
my advice is to suspend Gongylus from his office; to conciliate the
Ionians; to remain as a Grecian armament firm and united, and so
procure, on better terms, peace with Persia. And then let each State
retire within itself, and none aspire to rule the other. A thousand
free cities are better guard against the Barbarian than a single State
made up of republics overthrown and resting its strength upon hearts
enslaved."

"Do you too," said Pausanias, gnawing his nether lip, "Do you too,
Polydorus; you too, Gelon, agree with Cleomenes, that, if Athens is
better fitted than Sparta for the sovereignty of the seas, we should
yield to that restless rival so perilous a power?"

"Ships cost gold," said Polydorus. "Spartans have none to spare.
Mariners require skilful captains; Spartans know nothing of the sea."

"Moreover," quoth Gelon, "the ocean is a terrible element. What can
valour do against a storm? We may lose more men by adverse weather
than a century can repair. Let who will have the seas. Sparta has her
rocks and defiles."

"Men and peers," said Pausanias, ill repressing his scorn, "ye little
dream what arms ye place in the hands of the Athenians. I have done.
Take only this prophecy. You are now the head of Greece. You surrender
your sceptre to Athens, and become a second-rate power."

"Never second rate when Greece shall demand armed men," said Cleomenes
proudly.

"Armed men, armed men!" cried the more profound Pausanias. "Do you
suppose that commerce--that trade--that maritime energy--that fleets
which ransack the shores of the world, will not obtain a power greater
than mere brute-like valour? But as ye will, as ye will."

"As we speak our forefathers thought," said Gelon.

"And, Pausanias," said Cleomenes gravely, "as we speak, so think the
Ephors."

Pausanias fixed his dark eye on Cleomenes, and, after a brief pause,
saluted the Equals and withdrew. "Sparta," he muttered as he regained
his chamber, "Sparta, thou refusest to be great; but greatness is
necessary to thy son. Ah, their iron laws would constrain my soul! but
it shall wear them as a warrior wears his armour and adapts it to his
body. Thou shalt be queen of all Hellas despite thyself, thine Ephors,
and thy laws. Then only will I forgive thee."




CHAPTER IV.


Diagoras was sitting outside his door and giving various instructions
to the slaves employed on his farm, when, through an arcade thickly
covered with the vine, the light form of Antagoras came slowly in
sight.

"Hail to thee, Diagoras," said the Chian, "thou art the only wise man
I meet with. Thou art tranquil while all else are disturbed; and,
worshipping the great Mother, thou carest nought, methinks, for the
Persian who invades, or the Spartan who professes to defend."

"Tut," said Diagoras, in a whisper, "thou knowest the contrary: thou
knowest that if the Persian comes I am ruined; and, by the gods, I am
on a bed of thorns as long as the Spartan stays."

"Dismiss thy slaves," exclaimed Antagoras, in the same undertone; "I
would speak with thee on grave matters that concern us both."

After hastily finishing his instructions and dismissing his slaves,
Diagoras turned to the impatient Chian, and said:

"Now, young warrior, I am all ears for thy speech."

"Truly," said Antagoras, "if thou wert aware of what I am about to
utter, thou wouldst not have postponed consideration for thy daughter,
to thy care for a few jars of beggarly olives."

"Hem!" said Diagoras, peevishly. "Olives are not to be despised; oil
to the limbs makes them supple; to the stomach it gives gladness. Oil,
moreover, bringeth money when sold. But a daughter is the plague of
a man's life. First, one has to keep away lovers; and next to find
a husband; and when all is done, one has to put one's hand in one's
chest, and pay a tall fellow like thee for robbing one of one's own
child. That custom of dowries is abominable. In the good old times a
bridegroom, as was meet and proper, paid for his bride; now we poor
fathers pay him for taking her. Well, well, never bite thy forefinger,
and curl up thy brows. What thou hast to say, say."

"Diagoras, I know that thy heart is better than thy speech, and that,
much as thou covetest money, thou lovest thy child more. Know, then,
that Pausanias--a curse light on him!--brings shame upon Cleonice.
Know that already her name hath grown the talk of the camp. Know that
his visit to her the night before last was proclaimed in the Council
of the Captains as a theme for jest and rude laughter. By the head
of Zeus, how thinkest thou to profit by the stealthy wooings of this
black-browed Spartan? Knowest thou not that his laws forbid him to
marry Cleonice? Wouldst thou have him dishonour her? Speak out to him
as thou speakest to men, and tell him that the maidens of Byzantium
are not in the control of the General of the Greeks."

"Youth, youth," cried Diagoras, greatly agitated, "wouldst thou bring
my grey hairs to a bloody grave? wouldst thou see my daughter reft
from me by force--and--"

"How darest thou speak thus, old man?" interrupted the indignant
Chian. "If Pausanias wronged a virgin, all Hellas would rise against
him."

"Yes, but not till the ill were done, till my throat were cut, and my
child dishonoured. Listen. At first indeed, when, as ill-luck would
have it, Pausanias, lodging a few days under my roof, saw and admired
Cleonice, I did venture to remonstrate, and how think you he took it?
'Never,' quoth he, with his stern quivering lip, 'never did conquest
forego its best right to the smiles of beauty. The legends of
Hercules, my ancestor, tell thee that to him who labours for men,
the gods grant the love of women. Fear not that I should wrong thy
daughter--to woo her is not to wrong. But close thy door on me; immure
Cleonice from my sight; and nor armed slaves, nor bolts, nor bars
shall keep love from the loved one,' Therewith he turned on his heel
and left me. But the next day came a Lydian in his train, with a
goodly pannier of rich stuffs and a short Spartan sword. On the
pannier was written '_Friendship_,' on the sword '_Wrath_,' and Alcman
gave me a scrap of parchment, whereon, with the cursed brief wit of a
Spartan, was inscribed '_Choose_!' Who could doubt which to take? who,
by the Gods, would prefer three inches of Spartan iron in his stomach
to a basketful of rich stuffs for his shoulders? Wherefore, from that
hour, Pausanias comes as he lists. But Cleonice humours him not, let
tongues wag as they may. Easier to take three cities than that child's
heart."

"Is it so indeed?" exclaimed the Chian, joyfully; "Cleonice loves him
not?"

"Laughs at him to his beard: that is, would laugh if he wore one."

"O Diagoras!" cried Antagoras, "hear me, hear me. I need not remind
thee that our families are united by the hospitable ties; that amongst
thy treasures thou wilt find the gifts of my ancestors for five
generations; that when, a year since, my affairs brought me to
Byzantium, I came to thee with the symbols of my right to claim thy
hospitable cares. On leaving thee we broke the sacred die. I have one
half, thou the other. In that visit I saw and loved Cleonice. Fain
would I have told my love, but then my father lived, and I feared lest
he should oppose my suit; therefore, as became me, I was silent. On
my return home, my fears were confirmed; my father desired that I, a
Chian, should wed a Chian. Since I have been with the fleet, news has
reached me that the urn holds my father's ashes." Here the young Chian
paused. "Alas, alas!" he murmured, smiting his breast, "and I was not
at hand to fix over thy doors the sacred branch, to give thee the
parting kiss, and receive into my lips thy latest breath. May Hermes,
O father, have led thee to pleasant groves!"

Diagoras, who had listened attentively to the young Chian, was touched
by his grief, and said pityingly:

"I know thou art a good son, and thy father was a worthy man, though
harsh. It is a comfort to think that all does not die with the dead.
His money at least survives him."

"But," resumed Antagoras, not heeding this consolation,--"but now I
am free: and ere this, so soon as my mourning garment had been lain
aside, I had asked thee to bless me with Cleonice, but that I feared
her love was gone--gone to the haughty Spartan. Thou reassurest me;
and in so doing, thou confirmest the fair omens with which Aphrodite
has received my offerings. Therefore, I speak out. No dowry ask I with
Cleonice, save such, more in name than amount, as may distinguish the
wife from the concubine, and assure her an honoured place amongst my
kinsmen. Thou knowest I am rich; thou knowest that my birth dates
from the oldest citizens of Chios. Give me thy child, and deliver her
thyself at once from the Spartan's power. Once mine, all the fleets of
Hellas are her protection, and our marriage torches are the swords of
a Grecian army. O Diagoras, I clasp thy knees; put thy right hand in
mine. Give me thy child as wife!"

The Byzantine was strongly affected. The suitor was one who, in birth
and possessions, was all that he could desire for his daughter; and at
Byzantium there did not exist that feeling against intermarriages with
the foreigner which prevailed in towns more purely Greek, though in
many of them, too, that antique prejudice had worn away. On the other
hand, by transferring to Antagoras his anxious charge, he felt that he
should take the best course to preserve it untarnished from the fierce
love of Pausanias, and there was truth in the Chian's suggestion. The
daughter of a Byzantine might be unprotected; the wife of an Ionian
captain was safe, even from the power of Pausanias. As these
reflexions occurred to him, he placed his right hand in the Chian's,
and said:

"Be it as thou wilt; I consent to betroth thee to Cleonice. Follow me;
thou art free to woo her."

So saying, he rose, and, as if in fear of his own second thoughts, he
traversed the hall with hasty strides to the interior of the mansion.
He ascended a flight of steps, and, drawing aside a curtain suspended
between two columns, Antagoras, who followed timidly behind, beheld
Cleonice.

As was the wont in the domestic life of all Grecian states, her
handmaids were around the noble virgin. Two were engaged on
embroidery, one in spinning, a fourth was reading aloud to Cleonice,
and that at least was a rare diversion to women, for few had the
education of the fair Byzantine. Cleonice herself was half reclined
upon a bench inlaid with ivory and covered with cushions; before her
stood a small tripod table on which she leant the arm, the hand of
which supported her cheek, and she seemed listening to the lecture
of the slave with earnest and absorbed attention, so earnest, so
absorbed, that she did not for some moments perceive the entrance of
Diagoras and the Chian.

"Child," said the former--and Cleonice started to her feet, and stood
modestly before her father, her eyes downcast, her arms crossed upon
her bosom--"child, I bid thee welcome my guest-friend, Antagoras of
Chios. Slaves, ye may withdraw."

Cleonice bowed her head; and an unquiet, anxious change came over her
countenance.

As soon as the slaves were gone, Diagoras resumed--

"Daughter, I present to thee a suitor for thy hand; receive him as I
have done, and he shall have my leave to carve thy name on every tree
in the garden, with the lover's epithet of 'Beautiful,' attached to
it. Antagoras, look up, then, and speak for thyself."

But Antagoras was silent; and a fear unknown to his frank hardy nature
came over him. With an arch smile, Diagoras, deeming his presence no
longer necessary or expedient, lifted the curtain, and lover and maid
were left alone.

Then, with an effort, and still with hesitating accents, the Chian
spoke--

"Fair virgin,--not in the groves of Byzantium will thy name be first
written by the hand of Antagoras. In my native Chios the myrtle trees
are already eloquent of thee. Since I first saw thee, I loved. Maiden,
wilt thou be my wife?"

Thrice moved the lips of Cleonice, and thrice her voice seemed to fail
her. At length she said,--"Chian thou art a stranger, and the laws of
the Grecian cities dishonour the stranger whom the free citizen stoops
to marry."

"Nay," cried Antagoras, "such cruel laws are obsolete in Chios. Nature
and custom, and love's almighty goddess, long since have set them
aside. Fear not, the haughtiest matron of my native state will not be
more honoured than the Byzantine bride of Antagoras."

"Is it in Sparta only that such laws exist?" said Cleonice, half
unconsciously, and to the sigh with which she spoke a deep blush
succeeded.

"Sparta!" exclaimed Antagoras, with a fierce and jealous pang--"Ah,
are thy thoughts then upon the son of Sparta? Were Pausanias a Chian,
wouldst thou turn from him scornfully as thou now dost from me?"

"Not scornfully, Antagoras," answered Cleonice (who had indeed averted
her face, at his reproachful question; but now turned it full
upon him, with an expression of sad and pathetic sweetness), "not
scornfully do I turn from thee, though with pain; for what worthier
homage canst thou render to woman, than honourable love? Gratefully do
I hearken to the suit that comes from thee; but gratitude is not the
return thou wouldst ask, Antagoras. My hand is my father's; my heart,
alas, is mine. Thou mayst claim from him the one; the other, neither
he can give, nor thou receive."

"Say not so, Cleonice," cried the Chian; "say not, that thou canst not
love me, if so I am to interpret thy words. Love brings love with the
young. How canst thou yet know thine own heart? Tarry till thou hast
listened to mine. As the fire on the altar spreads from offering to
offering, so spreads love; its flame envelops all that are near to it.
Thy heart will catch the heavenly spark from mine."

"Chian," said Cleonice, gently withdrawing the hand that he sought to
clasp, "when as my father's guest-friend thou wert a sojourner within
these walls, oft have I heard thee speak, and all thy words spoke the
thoughts of a noble soul. Were it otherwise, not thus would I now
address thee. Didst thou love gold, and wooed in me but the child of
the rich Diagoras, or wert thou one of those who would treat for
a wife, as a trader for a slave, invoking Her, but disdaining
Aphrodite, I should bow my head to my doom. But thou, Antagoras,
askest love for love; this I cannot give thee. Spare me, O generous
Chian. Let not my father enforce his right to my obedience."

"Answer me but one question," interrupted Antagoras in a low voice,
though with compressed lips: "Dost thou then love another?"

The blood mounted to the virgin's cheeks, it suffused her brow,
her neck, with burning blushes, and then receding, left her face
colourless as a statue. Then with tones low and constrained as his
own, she pressed her hand on her heart, and replied, "Thou sayest it;
I love another."

"And that other is Pausanias? Alas, thy silence, thy trembling, answer
me."

Antagoras groaned aloud and covered his face with his hands; but after
a short pause, he exclaimed with great emotion, "No, no--say not that
thou lovest Pausanias; say not that Aphrodite hath so accurst thee:
for to love Pausanias is to love dishonour."

"Hold, Chian! Not so: for my love has no hope. Our hearts are not our
own, but our actions are."

Antagoras gazed on her with suspense and awe; for as she spoke her
slight form dilated, her lip curled, her cheek glowed again, but
with the blush less of love than of pride. In her countenance, her
attitude, there was something divine and holy, such as would have
beseemed a priestess of Diana.

"Yes," she resumed, raising her eyes, and with a still and mournful
sweetness in her upraised features. "What I love is not Pausanias, it
is the glory of which he is the symbol, it is the Greece of which he
has been the Saviour. Let him depart, as soon he must--let these eyes
behold him no more; still there exists for me all that exists now--a
name, a renown, a dream. Never for me may the nuptial hymn resound, or
the marriage torch be illumined. O goddess of the silver bow, O
chaste and venerable Artemis! receive, protect thy servant; and ye,
O funereal gods, lead me soon, lead the virgin unreluctant to the
shades."

A superstitious fear, a dread as if his earthly love would violate
something sacred, chilled the ardour of the young Chian; and for
several moments both were silent.

At length, Antagoras, kissing the hem of her robe, said,--

"Maiden of Byzantium,--like thee then, I will love, though without
hope. I will not, I dare not, profane thy presence by prayers which
pain thee, and seem to me, having heard thee, almost guilty, as
if proffered to some nymph circling in choral dance the moonlit
mountain-tops of Delos. But ere I depart, and tell thy father that my
suit is over, O place at least thy right hand in mine, and swear to
me, not the bride's vow of faith and troth, but that vow which a
virgin sister may pledge to a brother, mindful to protect and to
avenge her. Swear to me, that if this haughty Spartan, contemning
alike men, laws, and the household gods, should seek to constrain thy
purity to his will; if thou shouldst have cause to tremble at power
and force; and fierce desire should demand what gentle love would but
reverently implore,--then, Cleonice, seeing how little thy father can
defend thee, wilt thou remember Antagoras, and through him, summon
around thee all the majesty of Hellas? Grant me but this prayer, and I
leave thee, if in sorrow, yet not with terror."

"Generous and noble Chian," returned Cleonice as her tears fell upon
the hand he extended to her,--"why, why do I so ill repay thee? Thy
love is indeed that which ennobles the heart that yields it, and her
who shall one day recompense thee for the loss of me. Fear not the
power of Pausanias: dream not that I shall need a defender, while
above us reign the gods, and below us lies the grave. Yet, to appease
thee, take my right hand, and hear my oath. If the hour comes when
I have need of man's honour against man's wrong, I will call on
Antagoras as a brother."

Their hands closed in each other; and not trusting himself to speech,
Antagoras turned away his face, and left the room.




CHAPTER V.


For some days, an appearance at least of harmony was restored to the
contending factions in the Byzantine camp.

Pausanias did not dismiss Gongylus from the government of the
city; but he sent one by one for the more important of the Ionian
complainants, listened to their grievances, and promised redress. He
adopted a more popular and gracious demeanour, and seemed, with a
noble grace, to submit to the policy of conciliating the allies.

But discontent arose from causes beyond his power, had he genuinely
exerted it, to remove. For it was a discontent that lay in the
hostility of race to race. Though the Spartan Equals had preached
courtesy to the Ionians, the ordinary manner of the Spartan warriors
was invariably offensive to the vain and susceptible confederates of
a more polished race. A Spartan, wherever he might be placed,
unconsciously assumed superiority. The levity of an Ionian was ever
displeasing to him. Out of the actual battle-field, they could have no
topics in common, none which did not provoke irritation and dispute.
On the other hand, most of the Ionians could ill conceal their
disaffection, mingled with something of just contempt at the notorious
and confessed incapacity of the Spartans for maritime affairs, while a
Spartan was yet the commander of the fleet. And many of them, wearied
with inaction, and anxious to return home, were willing to seize any
reasonable pretext for desertion. In this last motive lay the real
strength and safety of Pausanias. And to this end his previous policy
of arrogance was not so idle as it had seemed to the Greeks, and
appears still in the page of history. For a Spartan really anxious to
preserve the preeminence of his country, and to prevent the sceptre of
the seas passing to Athens, could have devised no plan of action more
sagacious and profound than one which would disperse the Ionians, and
the Athenians themselves, and reduce the operations of the Grecian
force to that land warfare in which the Spartan pre-eminence was
equally indisputable and undisputed. And still Pausanias, even in his
change of manner, plotted and intrigued and hoped for this end. Could
he once sever from the encampment the Athenians and the Ionian allies,
and yet remain with his own force at Byzantium until the Persian army
could collect on the Phrygian frontier, the way seemed clear to his
ambition. Under ordinary circumstances, in this object he might easily
have succeeded. But it chanced that all his schemes were met with
invincible mistrust by those in whose interest they were conceived,
and on whose co-operation they depended for success. The means adopted
by Pausanias in pursuit of his policy were too distasteful to the
national prejudices of the Spartan government, to enable him to elicit
from the national ambition of that government sufficient sympathy
with the object of it. The more he felt himself uncomprehended and
mistrusted by his countrymen, the more personal became the character,
and the more unscrupulous the course, of his ambition. Unhappily for
Pausanias moreover, the circumstances which chafed his pride, also
thwarted the satisfaction of his affections and his criminal ambition
was stimulated by that less guilty passion which shared with it the
mastery of a singularly turbulent and impetuous soul. Not his the love
of sleek, gallant, and wanton youth; it was the love of man in his
mature years, but of man to whom love till then had been unknown. In
that large and dark and stormy nature all passions once admitted took
the growth of Titans. He loved as those long lonely at heart alone can
love; he loved as love the unhappy when the unfamiliar bliss of the
sweet human emotion descends like dew upon the desert. To him Cleonice
was a creature wholly out of the range of experience. Differing in
every shade of her versatile humour from the only women he had known,
the simple, sturdy, uneducated maids and matrons of Sparta, her
softness enthralled him, her anger awed. In his dreams of future
power, of an absolute throne and unlimited dominion, Pausanias beheld
the fair Byzantine crowned by his side. Fiercely as he loved, and
little as the _sentiment_ of love mingled with his _passion_, he yet
thought not to dishonour a victim, but to elevate a bride. What though
the laws of Sparta were against such nuptials, was not the hour
approaching when these laws should be trampled under his armed heel?
Since the contract with the Persians, which Gongylus assured him
Xerxes would joyously and promptly fulfil, Pausanias already felt, in
a soul whose arrogance arose from the consciousness of powers that had
not yet found their field, as if he were not the subject of Sparta,
but her lord and king. In his interviews with Cleonice, his language
took a tone of promise and of hope that at times lulled her fears, and
communicated its sanguine colourings of the future to her own dreams.
With the elasticity of youth, her spirits rose from the solemn
despondency with which she had replied to the reproaches of Antagoras.
For though Pausanias spoke not openly of his schemes, though his
words were mysterious, and his replies to her questions ambiguous
and equivocal, still it seemed to her, seeing in him the hero of all
Hellas, so natural that he could make the laws of Sparta yield to the
weight of his authority, or relax in homage to his renown, that she
indulged the belief that his influence would set aside the iron
customs of his country. Was it too extravagant a reward to the
conqueror of the Mede to suffer him to select at least the partner of
his hearth? No, Hope was not dead in that young breast. Still might
she be the bride of him whose glory had dazzled her noble and
sensitive nature, till the faults that darkened it were lost in the
blaze. Thus insensibly to herself her tones became softer to her stern
lover, and her heart betrayed itself more in her gentle looks. Yet
again were there times when doubt and alarm returned with more than
their earlier force--times when, wrapt in his lurid and absorbing
ambition, Pausanias escaped from his usual suppressed reserve--times
when she recalled that night in which she had witnessed his interview
with the strangers of the East, and had trembled lest the altar should
be kindled upon the ruins of his fame. For Cleonice was wholly,
ardently, sublimely Greek, filled in each crevice of her soul with
its lovely poetry, its beautiful superstition, its heroic freedom. As
Greek, she had loved Pausanias, seeing in him the lofty incarnation of
Greece itself. The descendant of the demigod, the champion of
Plataea, the saviour of Hellas--theme for song till song should be no
more--these attributes were what she beheld and loved; and not to have
reigned by his side over a world would she have welcomed one object
of that evil ambition which renounced the loyalty of a Greek for the
supremacy of a king.

Meanwhile, though Antagoras had, with no mean degree of generosity,
relinquished his suit to Cleonice, he detected with a jealous
vigilance the continued visits of Pausanias, and burned with
increasing hatred against his favoured and powerful rival. Though,
in common with all the Greeks out of the Peloponnesus, he was very
imperfectly acquainted with the Spartan constitution, he could not be
blinded, like Cleonice, into the belief that a law so fundamental in
Sparta, and so general in all the primitive States of Greece, as that
which forbade intermarriage with a foreigner, could be cancelled for
the Regent of Sparta, and in favour of an obscure maiden of Byzantium.
Every visit Pausanias paid to Cleonice but served, in his eyes, as a
prelude to her ultimate dishonour. He lent himself, therefore, with
all the zeal of his vivacious and ardent character, to the design
of removing Pausanias himself from Byzantium. He plotted with the
implacable Uliades and the other Ionian captains to send to Sparta a
formal mission stating their grievances against the Regent, and urging
his recall. But the altered manner of Pausanias deprived them of their
just pretext; and the Ionians, more and more under the influence of
the Athenian chief, were disinclined to so extreme a measure without
the consent of Aristides and Cimon. These two chiefs were not passive
spectators of affairs so critical to their ambition for Athens--they
penetrated into the motives of Pausanias in the novel courtesy of
demeanour that he adopted, and they foresaw that if he could succeed
in wearing away the patience of the allies and dispersing the fleet,
yet without giving occasion for his own recall, the golden opportunity
of securing to Athens the maritime ascendancy would be lost. They
resolved, therefore, to make the occasion which the wiles of the
Regent had delayed; and towards this object Antagoras, moved by his
own jealous hate against Pausanias, worked incessantly. Fearless and
vigilant, he was ever on the watch for some new charge against the
Spartan chief ever relentless in stimulating suspicion, aggravating
discontent, inflaming the fierce, and arguing with the timid. His less
exalted station allowed him to mix more familiarly with the various
Ionian officers than would have become the high-born Cimon, and the
dignified repute of Aristides. Seeking to distract his mind from the
haunting thought of Cleonice, he flung himself with the ardour of his
Greek temperament into the social pleasures, which took a zest from
the design that he carried into them all. In the banquets, in the
sports, he was ever seeking to increase the enemies of his rival,
and where he charmed a gay companion, there he often enlisted a bold
conspirator.

Pausanias, the unconscious or the careless object of the Ionian's
jealous hate, could not resist the fatal charm of Cleonice's presence;
and if it sometimes exasperated the more evil elements of his nature,
at other times it so lulled them to rest, that had the Fates given him
the rightful claim to that single treasure, not one guilty thought
might have disturbed the majesty of a soul which, though undisciplined
and uncultured, owed half its turbulence and half its rebellious pride
to its baffled yearnings for human affection and natural joy. And
Cleonice, unable to shun the visits which her weak and covetous
father, despite his promised favour to the suit of Antagoras, still
encouraged; and feeling her honour, at least, if not her peace, was
secured by that ascendancy which, with each successive interview
between them, her character more and more asserted over the Spartan's
higher nature, relinquished the tormenting levity of tone whereby
she had once sought to elude his earnestness, or conceal her own
sentiments. An interest in a fate so solemn, an interest far deeper
than mere human love, stole into her heart and elevated its instincts.
She recognized the immense compassion which was due to the man so
desolate at the head of armaments, so dark in the midst of glory.
Centuries roll, customs change, but, ever since the time of the
earliest mother, woman yearns to be the soother.




CHAPTER VI.


It was the hour of the day when between the two principal meals of the
Greeks men surrendered themselves to idleness or pleasure; when groups
formed in the market-place, or crowded the barbers' shops to gossip
and talk of news; when the tale-teller or ballad-singer collected
round him on the quays his credulous audience; when on playgrounds
that stretched behind the taverns or without the walls the more active
youths assembled, and the quoit was hurled, or mimic battles waged
with weapons of wood, or the Dorians weaved their simple, the Ionians
their more intricate or less decorous, dances. At that hour Lysander,
wandering from the circles of his countrymen, walked musingly by the
sea-shore.

"And why," said the voice of a person who had approached him
unperceived, "and why, O Lysander, art thou absent from thy comrades,
thou model and theme of the youths of Sparta, foremost in their manly
sports, as in their martial labours?"

Lysander turned and bowed low his graceful head, for he who accosted
him was scarcely more honoured by the Athenians, whom his birth, his
wealth, and his popular demeanour dazzled, than by the plain sons
of Sparta, who, in his simple garb, his blunt and hasty manner, his
professed admiration for all things Spartan, beheld one Athenian at
least congenial to their tastes.

"The child that misses its mother," answered Lysander," has small joy
with its playmates. And I, a Spartan, pine for Sparta."

"Truly," returned Cimon, "there must be charms in thy noble country of
which we other Greeks know but little, if amidst all the luxuries
and delights of Byzantium thou canst pine for her rugged hills. And
although, as thou knowest well, I was once a sojourner in thy city
as ambassador from my own, yet to foreigners so little of the inner
Spartan life is revealed, that I pray thee to satisfy my curiosity and
explain to me the charm that reconciles thee and thine to institutions
which seem to the Ionians at war with the pleasures and the graces of
social life."[26]

"Ill can the native of one land explain to the son of another why he
loves it," returned Lysander. "That which the Ionian calls pleasure
is to me but tedious vanity; that which he calls grace, is to me but
enervate levity. Me it pleases to find the day, from sunrise to night,
full of occupations that leave no languor, that employ, but not
excite. For the morning, our gymnasia, our military games, the
chace--diversions that brace the limbs and leave us in peace fit for
war--diversions, which, unlike the brawls of the wordy Agora, bless us
with the calm mind and clear spirit resulting from vigorous habits,
and ensuring jocund health. Noon brings our simple feast, shared in
public, enlivened by jest; late at eve we collect in our Leschae, and
the winter nights seem short, listening to the old men's talk of our
sires and heroes. To us life is one serene yet active holiday. No
Spartan condescends to labour, yet no Spartan can womanise himself by
ease. For us, too, differing from you Ionian Greeks, for us women are
companions, not slaves. Man's youth is passed under the eyes and in
the presence of those from whom he may select, as his heart inclines,
the future mother of his children. Not for us your feverish and
miserable ambitions, the intrigues of demagogues, the drudgery of the
mart, the babble of the populace; we alone know the quiet repose
of heart. That which I see everywhere else, the gnawing strife of
passion, visits not the stately calm of the Spartan life. We have the
leisure, not of the body alone, but of the soul. Equality with us is
the all in all, and we know not that jealous anguish--the desire to
rise one above the other. We busy ourselves not in making wealth,
in ruling mobs, in ostentatious rivalries of state, and gaud, and
power--struggles without an object. When we struggle it is for an
end. Nothing moves us from our calm, but danger to Sparta, or woe to
Hellas. Harmony, peace, and order--these are the graces of our social
life. Pity us, O Athenian!"

Cimon had listened with profound attention to a speech unusually
prolix and descriptive for a Spartan; and he sighed deeply as it
closed. For that young Athenian, destined to so renowned a place in
the history of his country, was, despite his popular manners, no
favourer of the popular passions. Lofty and calm, and essentially an
aristocrat by nature and opinion, this picture of a life unruffled by
the restless changes of democracy, safe and aloof from the shifting
humours of the multitude, charmed and allured him. He forgot for the
moment those counter propensities which made him still Athenian--the
taste for magnificence, the love of women, and the desire of rule. His
busy schemes slept within him, and he answered:

"Happy is the Spartan who thinks with you. Yet," he added, after a
pause, "yet own that there are amongst you many to whom the life you
describe has ceased to proffer the charms that enthrall you, and
who envy the more diversified and exciting existence of surrounding
States. Lysander's eulogiums shame his chief Pausanias."

"It is not for me, nor for thee, whose years scarce exceed my own, to
judge of our elders in renown," said Lysander, with a slight shade
over his calm brow. "Pausanias will surely be found still a Spartan,
when Sparta needs him; and the heart of the Heracleid beats under the
robe of the Mede."

"Be frank with me, Lysander; thou knowest that my own countrymen often
jealously accuse me of loving Sparta too well. I imitate, say they,
the manners and dress of the Spartan, as Pausanias those of the Mede.
Trust me then, and bear with me, when I say that Pausanias ruins the
cause of Sparta. If he tarry here longer in the command he will render
all the allies enemies to thy country. Already he has impaired his
fame and dimmed his laurels; already, despite his pretexts and
excuses, we perceive that his whole nature is corrupted. Recall him
to Sparta, while it is yet time--time to reconcile the Greeks with
Sparta, time to save the hero of Plataea from the contaminations of
the East. Preserve his own glory, dearer to thee as his special friend
than to all men, yet dear to me, though an Athenian, from the memory
of the deeds which delivered Hellas."

Cimon spoke with the blunt and candid eloquence natural to him, and to
which his manly countenance and earnest tone and character for truth
gave singular effect.

Lysander remained long silent. At length he said, "I neither deny nor
assent to thine arguments, son of Miltiades. The Ephors alone can
judge of their wisdom."

"But if we address them, by message, to the Ephors, thou and the
nobler Spartans will not resent our remonstrances?"

"All that injures Pausanias Lysander will resent. Little know I of the
fables of poets, but Homer is at least as familiar to the Dorian as to
the Ionian, and I think with him that between friends there is but one
love and one anger."

"Then are the frailties of Pausanias dearer to thee than his fame, or
Pausanias himself dearer to thee than Sparta--the erring brother than
the venerable mother."

Lysander's voice died on his lips; the reproof struck home to him.
He turned away his face, and with a slow wave of his hand seemed to
implore forbearance. Cimon was touched by the action and the generous
embarrassment of the Spartan; he saw, too, that he had left in the
mind he had addressed thoughts that might work as he had designed, and
he judged by the effect produced on Lysander what influence the same
arguments might effect addressed to others less under the control of
personal friendship. Therefore, with a few gentle words, he turned
aside, continued his way, and left Lysander alone.

Entering the town, the Athenian threaded his path through some of the
narrow lanes and alleys that wound from the quays towards the citadel,
avoiding the broader and more frequented streets. The course he took
was such as rendered it little probable that he should encounter any
of the higher classes, and especially the Spartans, who from their
constitutional pride shunned the resorts of the populace. But as he
came nearer the citadel stray Helots were seen at times, emerging from
the inns and drinking houses, and these stopped short and inclined low
if they caught sight of him at a distance, for his hat and staff, his
majestic stature, and composed step, made them take him for a Spartan.

One of these slaves, however, emerging suddenly from a house close by
which Cimon passed, recognized him, and retreating within abruptly,
entered a room in which a man sat alone, and seemingly in profound
thought; his cheek rested on one hand, with the other he leaned upon a
small lyre, his eyes were bent on the ground, and he started, as a man
does dream-like from a reverie, when the Helot touched him and said
abruptly, and in a tone of surprise and inquiry,--

"Cimon, the Athenian, is ascending the hill towards the Spartan
quarter."

"The Spartan quarter! Cimon!" exclaimed Alcman, for it was he. "Give
me thy cap and hide."

Hastily enduing himself in these rough garments, and drawing the cap
over his face, the Mothon hurried to the threshold, and, seeing the
Athenian at the distance, followed his footsteps, though with the
skill of a man used to ambush he kept himself unseen--now under the
projecting roofs of the houses, now skirting the wall, which, heavy
with buttresses, led towards the outworks of the citadel. And with
such success did he pursue his track that when Cimon paused at last
at the place of his destination, and gave one vigilant and searching
glance around him, he detected no living form.

He had then reached a small space of table-land on which stood a few
trees of great age--all that time and the encroachments of the citadel
and the town had spared of the sacred grove which formerly surrounded
a rude and primitive temple, the grey columns of which gleamed through
the heavy foliage. Passing, with a slow and cautious step, under the
thick shadow of these trees, Cimon now arrived before the open door of
the temple, placed at the east so as to admit the first beams of the
rising sun. Through the threshold, in the middle of the fane, the
eye rested on the statue of Apollo, raised upon a lofty pedestal and
surrounded by a rail--a statue not such as the later genius of the
Athenian represented the god of light, and youth, and beauty; not
wrought from Parian marble, or smoothest ivory, and in the divinest
proportions of the human form, but rude, formal, and roughly hewn from
the wood of the yew-tree--some early effigy of the god, made by the
simple piety of the first Dorian colonisers of Byzantium. Three forms
stood mute by an altar, equally homely and ancient, and adorned with
horns, placed a little apart, and considerably below the statue.

As the shadow of the Athenian, who halted at the threshold, fell long
and dark along the floor, the figures turned slowly, and advanced
towards him. With an inclination of his head Cimon retreated from the
temple; and, looking round, saw abutting from the rear of the building
a small cell or chamber, which doubtless in former times had served
some priestly purpose, but now, doorless, empty, desolate, showed the
utter neglect into which the ancient shrine of the Dorian god had
fallen amidst the gay and dissolute Byzantians. To this cell Cimon
directed his steps; the men he had seen in the temple followed him,
and all four, with brief and formal greeting, seated themselves,
Cimon on a fragment of some broken column, the others on a bench that
stretched along the wall.

"Peers of Sparta," said the Athenian, "ye have doubtless ere this
revolved sufficiently the grave matter which I opened to you in a
former conference, and in which, to hear your decision, I seek at your
appointment these sacred precincts."

"Son of Miltiades," answered the blunt Polydorus, "you inform us that
it is the intention of the Athenians to despatch a messenger to Sparta
demanding the instant recall of Pausanias. You ask us to second that
request. But without our aid the Athenians are masters to do as they
will. Why should we abet your quarrel against the Regent?"

"Friend," replied Cimon, "we, the Athenians, confess to no quarrel
with Pausanias; what we demand is to avoid all quarrel with him or
yourselves. You seem to have overlooked my main arguments. Permit me
to reurge them briefly. If Pausanias remains, the allies have resolved
openly to revolt; if you, the Spartans, assist your chief, as methinks
you needs must do, you are at once at war with the rest of the Greeks.
If you desert him you leave Hellas without a chief, and we will choose
one of our own. Meanwhile, in the midst of our dissensions, the towns
and states well affected to Persia will return to her sway; and Persia
herself falls upon us as no longer an united enemy but an easy prey.
For the sake, therefore, of Sparta and of Greece, we entreat you to
co-operate with us; or rather, to let the recall of Pausanias be
effected more by the wise precaution of the Spartans than by the
fierce resolve of the other Greeks. So you save best the dignity of
your State, and so, in reality, you best serve your chief. For less
shameful to him is it to be recalled by you than to be deposed by us."

"I know not," said Gelon, surlily, "what Sparta hath to do at all with
this foreign expedition; we are safe in our own defiles."

"Pardon me, if I remind you that you were scarcely safe at
Thermopylae, and that had the advice Demaratus proffered to Xerxes
been taken, and that island of Cithera, which commands Sparta itself,
been occupied by Persian troops, as in a future time, if Sparta desert
Greece, it may be, you were undone. And, wisely or not, Sparta is now
in command at Byzantium, and it behoves her to maintain, with the
dignity she assumes, the interests she represents. Grant that
Pausanias be recalled, another Spartan can succeed him. Whom of your
countrymen would you prefer to that high post, if you, O Peers, aid us
in the dismissal of Pausanias?[27]


Notes:

[26] Alexander, King of Macedon, had visited the Athenians with
overtures of peace and alliance from Xerxes and Mardonius. These
overtures were confined to the Athenians alone, and the Spartans
were fearful lest they should be accepted. The Athenians, however,
generously refused them. Gold, said they, hath no amount, earth no
territory how beautiful soever that could tempt the Athenians to
accept conditions from the Mede for the servitude of Greece. On this
the Persians invaded Attica, and the Athenians, after waiting in vain
for promised aid from Sparta, took refuge at Salamis. Meanwhile, they
had sent messengers or ambassadors to Sparta, to remonstrate on the
violation of their agreement in delaying succour. This chanced at the
very time when, by the death of his father Cleombrotus, Pausanias
became Regent. Slowly, and after much hesitation, the Spartans sent
them aid under Pausanias. Two of the ambassadors were Aristides and
Cimon.

[27] This chapter was left unfinished by the author; probably with the
intention of recasting it. Such an intention, at least, is indicated
by the marginal marks upon the MS.





BOOK III.




CHAPTER I.


The fountain sparkled to the noonday, the sward around it was
sheltered from the sun by vines formed into shadowy arcades, with
interlaced leaves for roof. Afar through the vistas thus formed
gleamed the blue of a sleeping sea.

Under the hills, or close by the margin of the fountain, Cleonice was
seated upon a grassy knoll, covered with wild flowers. Behind her, at
a little distance, grouped her handmaids, engaged in their womanly
work, and occasionally conversing in whispers. At her feet reposed the
grand form of Pausanias. Alcman stood not far behind him, his hand,
resting on his lyre, his gaze fixed upon the upward jet of the
fountain.

"Behold," said Cleonice, "how the water soars up to the level of its
source!"

"As my soul would soar to thy love," said the Spartan, amorously.

"As thy soul should soar to the stars. O son of Hercules, when I hear
thee burst into thy wild nights of ambition, I see not thy way to the
stars."

"Why dost thou ever thus chide the ambition which may give me thee?"

"No, for thou mightest then be as much below me as thou art now above.
Too humble to mate with the Heracleid, I am too proud to stoop to the
Tributary of the Mede."

"Tributary for a sprinkling of water and a handful of earth. Well,
my pride may revolt, too, from that tribute. But, alas! what is the
tribute Sparta exacts from me now?--personal liberty--freedom of soul
itself. The Mede's Tributary may be a king over millions; the Spartan
Regent is a slave to the few."

"Cease--cease--cease. I will not hear thee," cried Cleonice, placing
her hands on her ears.

Pausanias gently drew them away; and holding them both captive in
the large clasp of his own right hand, gazed eagerly into her pure,
unshrinking eyes.

"Tell me," he said, "for in much thou art wiser than I am, unjust
though thou art. Tell me this. Look onward to the future with a gaze
as steadfast as now meets mine, and say if thou canst discover any
path, except that which it pleases thee to condemn, which may lead
thee and me to the marriage altar!"

Down sank those candid eyes, and the virgin's cheek grew first rosy
red, and then pale, as if every drop of blood had receded to the
heart.

"Speak!" insisted Pausanias, softening his haughty voice to its
meekest tone.

"I cannot see the path to the altar," murmured Cleonice, and the tears
rolled down her cheeks.

"And if thou seest it not," returned Pausanias, "art thou brave enough
to say--Be we lost to each other for life? I, though man and Spartan,
am not brave enough to say that!"

He released her hands as he spoke, and clasped his own over his face.
Both were long silent.

Alcman had for some moments watched the lovers with deep interest, and
had caught into his listening ears the purport of their words. He now
raised his lyre, and swept his hand over the chords. The touch was
that of a master, and the musical sounds produced their effect on
all. The handmaids paused from their work. Cleonice turned her eyes
wistfully towards the Mothon. Pausanias drew his hands from his face,
and cried joyously, "I accept the omen. Foster-brother, I have heard
that measure to a Hymeneal Song. Sing us the words that go with the
melody."

"Nay," said Alcman, gently, "the words are not those which are sung
before youth and maiden when they walk over perishing flowers to
bridal altars. They are the words which embody a legend of the land in
which the heroes of old dwell, removed from earth, yet preserved from
Hades."

"Ah," said Cleonice--and a strange expression, calmly mournful,
settled on her features--"then the words may haply utter my own
thoughts. Sing them to us, I pray thee."

The Mothon bowed his head, and thus began:--

THE ISLE OF SPIRITS.

    Many wonders on the ocean
      By the moonlight may be seen;
    Under moonlight on the Euxine
      Rose the blessed silver isle,

    As Leostratus of Croton,
      At the Pythian God's behest,
    Steer'd along the troubled waters
      To the tranquil spirit-land.

    In the earthquake of the battle,
      When the Locrians reel'd before
    Croton's shock of marching iron,
      Strode a Phantom to their van:

    Strode the shade of Locrian Ajax,
      Guarding still the native soil,
    And Leostratus, confronting,
      Wounded fell before the spear.

    Leech and herb the wound could heal not
      Said the Pythian God, "Depart,
    Voyage o'er the troubled Euxine
      To the tranquil spirit-land.

    "There abides the Locrian Ajax,
      He who gave the wound shall heal;
    Godlike souls are in their mercy
      Stronger yet than in their wrath."

    While at ease on lulled waters
      Rose the blessed silver isle,
    Purple vines in lengthening vistas
      Knit the hill-top to the beach.

    And the beach had sparry caverns,
      And a floor of golden sands,
    And wherever soared the cypress,
      Underneath it bloomed the rose.

    Glimmered there amid the vine trees,
      Thoro' cavern, over beach,
    Lifelike shadows of a beauty
      Which the living know no more,

    Towering statures of great heroes,
      They who fought at Thebes and Troy;
    And with looks that poets dream of
      Beam'd the women heroes loved.

    Kingly, forth before their comrades,
      As the vessel touch'd the shore,
    Came the stateliest Two, by Hymen
      Ever hallowed into One.

    As He strode, the forests trembled
      To the awe that crowned his brow:
    As She stepp'd, the ocean dimpled
      To the ray that left her smile.

    "Welcome hither, fearless warrior!"
      Said a voice in which there slept
    Thunder-sounds to scatter armies,
      As a north-wind scatters leaves.

    "Welcome hither, wounded sufferer,"
      Said a voice of music low
    As the coo of doves that nestle
      Under summer boughs at noon.

    "Who are ye, O shapes of glory?"
      Ask'd the wondering living man:
    Quoth the Man-ghost, "This is Helen,
      And the Fair is for the Brave.

    "Fairest prize to bravest victor;
      Whom doth Greece her bravest deem?"
    Said Leostratus, "Achilles:"
      "Bride and bridegroom then are we."

    "Low I kneel to thee, Pelides,
      But, O marvel, she thy bride,
    She whose guilt unpeopled Hellas,
      She whose marriage lights fired Troy?"

    Frown'd the large front of Achilles,
      Overshadowing sea and sky,
    Even as when between Olympus
      And Oceanus hangs storm.

    "Know, thou dullard," said Pelides,
      "That on the funereal pyre
    Earthly sins are purged from glory,
      And the Soul is as the Name."

    If to her in life--a Paris,
      If to me in life--a slave,
    Helen's mate is _here_ Achilles,
      Mine--the sister of the stars.

    Nought of her survives but beauty,
      Nought of me survives but fame;
    Here the Beautiful and Famous
      Intermingle evermore."

    Then throughout the Blessed Island
      Sang aloud the Race of Light,
   "Know, the Beautiful and Famous
      Marry here for evermore!"

"Thy song bears a meaning deeper than its words," said Pausanias; "but
if that meaning be consolation, I comprehend it not."

"I do," said Cleonice. "Singer, I pray thee draw near. Let us talk of
what my lost mother said was the favourite theme of the grander sages
of Miletus. Let us talk of what lies afar and undiscovered amid waters
more troubled than the Euxine. Let us speak of the Land of Souls."

"Who ever returned from that land to tell us of it?" said Pausanias.
"Voyagers that never voyaged thither save in song."

"Son of Cleombrotus," said Alcman, "hast thou not heard that in one of
the cities founded by thine ancestor, Hercules, and named after his
own name, there yet dwells a Priesthood that can summon to living eyes
the Phantoms of the Dead?"

"No," answered Pausanias, with the credulous wonder common to
eager natures which Philosophy has not withdrawn from the realm of
superstition.

"But," asked Cleonice, "does it need the Necromancer to convince us
that the soul does not perish when the breath leaves the lips? If
I judge the burthen of thy song aright, thou art not, O singer,
uninitiated in the divine and consoling doctrines which, emanating, it
is said, from the schools of Miletus, establish the immortality of the
soul, not for Demigods and Heroes only, but for us all; which imply
the soul's purification from earthly sins, in some regions less
chilling and stationary than the sunless and melancholy Hades."

Alcman looked at the girl surprised.

"Art thou not, maiden," said he, "one of the many female disciples
whom the successors of Pythagoras the Samian have enrolled?"

"Nay," said Cleonice, modestly; "but my mother had listened to great
teachers of wisdom, and I speak imperfectly the thoughts I have heard
her utter when she told me she had no terror of the grave."

"Fair Byzantine," returned the Mothon, while Pausanias, leaning his
upraised face on his hand, listened mutely to themes new to his mind
and foreign to his Spartan culture. "Fair Byzantine, we in Lacedaemon,
whether free or enslaved, are not educated to the subtle learning
which distinguishes the intellect of Ionian Sages. But I, born and
licensed to be a poet, converse eagerly with all who swell the stores
which enrich the treasure-house of song. And thus, since we have left
the land of Sparta, and more especially in yon city, the centre of
many tribes and of many minds, I have picked up, as it were, desultory
and scattered notions, which, for want of a fitting teacher, I bind
and arrange for myself as well as I may. And since the ideas that now
float through the atmosphere of Hellas are not confined to the great,
nay, perhaps are less visible to them, than to those whose eyes are
not riveted on the absorbing substances of ambition and power, so I
have learned something, I know not how, save that I have listened and
reflected. And here, where I have heard what sages conjecture of a
world which seems so far off, but to which we are so near that we may
reach it in a moment, my interest might indeed be intense. For what is
this world to him who came into it a slave!"

"Alcman," exclaimed Pausanias, "the foster-brother of the Heracleid is
no more a slave."

The Mothon bowed his head gratefully, but the expression on his face
retained the same calm and sombre resignation.

"Alas," said Cleonice, with the delicacy of female consolation, "who
in this life is really free? Have citizens no thraldom in custom and
law? Are we not all slaves?"

"True. All slaves!" murmured the royal victor. "Envy none, O Alcman.
Yet," he continued gloomily, "what is the life beyond the grave which
sacred tradition and ancient song holds out to us? Not thy silver
island, vain singer, unless it be only for an early race more
immediately akin to the Gods. Shadows in the shade are the dead; at
the best reviving only their habits when on earth, in phantom-like
delusions; aiming spectral darts like Orion at spectral lions; things
bloodless and pulseless; existences followed to no purpose through
eternity, as dreams are through a night. Who cares so to live again?
Not I."

"The sages that now rise around, and speak oracles different from
those heard at Delphi," said Alcman, "treat not thus the Soul's
immortality. They begin by inquiring how creation rose; they seek to
find the primitive element; what that may be they dispute; some say
the fiery, some the airy, some the ethereal element. Their language
here is obscure. But it is a something which forms, harmonizes, works,
and lives on for ever. And of that something is the Soul; creative,
harmonious, active, an element in itself. Out of its development here,
that soul comes on to a new development elsewhere. If here the beginning
lead to that new development in what we call virtue, it moves to light
and joy:--if it can only roll on through the grooves it has here made
for itself, in what we call vice and crime, its path is darkness and
wretchedness."

"In what we call virtue--what we call vice and crime? Ah," said
Pausanias, with a stern sneer, "Spartan virtue, O Alcman, is what a
Helot may call crime. And if ever the Helot rose and shouted freedom,
would he not say, This is virtue? Would the Spartan call it virtue,
too, my foster-brother?"

"Son of Cleombrotus," answered Alcman, "it is not for me to vindicate
the acts of the master; nor to blame the slave who is of my race. Yet
the sage definers of virtue distinguish between the Conscience of
a Polity and that of the Individual Man. Self-preservation is the
instinct of every community, and all the ordinances ascribed to
Lycurgus are designed to preserve the Spartan existence. For what are
the pure Spartan race? a handful of men established as lords in the
midst of a hostile population. Close by the eyrie thine eagle fathers
built in the rocks, hung the silent Amyclae, a city of foes that cost
the Spartans many generations to subdue. Hence thy State was a camp,
its citizens sentinels; its children were brought up from the cradle
to support the stern life to which necessity devoted the men. Hardship
and privation were second nature. Not enough to be brave; vigilance
was equally essential. Every Spartan life was precious; therefore came
the cunning which characterises the Spartan; therefore the boy is
permitted to steal, but punished if detected; therefore the whole
Commonwealth strives to keep aloof from the wars of Greece unless
itself be threatened. A single battle in a common cause might suffice
to depopulate the Spartan race, and leave it at the mercy of the
thousands that so reluctantly own its dominion, Hence the ruthless
determination to crush the spirit, to degrade the class of the
enslaved Helots; hence its dread lest the slumbering brute force of
the Servile find in its own masses a head to teach the consciousness,
and a hand to guide the movements, of its power. These are the
necessities of the Polity, its vices are the outgrowth of its
necessities; and the life that so galls thee, and which has sometimes
rendered mad those who return to it from having known another, and the
danger that evermore surrounds the lords of a sullen multitude, are
the punishments of these vices. Comprehendest thou?"

"I comprehend."

"But individuals have a conscience apart from that of the Community.
Every community has its errors in its laws. No human laws, how
skilfully soever framed, but give to a national character defects as
well as merits, merits as well as defects. Craft, selfishness, cruelty
to the subdued, inhospitable frigidity to neighbours, make the defects
of the Spartan character. But," added Alcman, with a kind of reluctant
anguish in his voice, "the character has its grand virtues, too, or
would the Helots not be the masters? Valour indomitable; grand scorn
of death; passionate ardour for the State which is so severe a mother
to them; antique faith in the sacred altars; sublime devotion to what
is held to be duty. Are these not found in the Spartan beyond all
the Greeks, as thou seest them in thy friend Lysander; in that soul,
stately, pure, compact in its own firm substance as a statue within
a temple is in its Parian stone? But what the Gods ask from man is
virtue in himself, according as he comprehends it. And, therefore,
here all societies are equal; for the Gods pardon in the man the
faults he shares with his Community, and ask from him but the good and
the beautiful, such as the nature of his Community will permit him to
conceive and to accomplish. Thou knowest that there are many kinds of
music--for instance, the Doric, the Aeolian, the Ionian--in Hellas.
The Lydians have their music, the Phrygians theirs too. The Scyth and
the Mede doubtless have their own. Each race prefers the music it
cultivates, and finds fault with the music of other races. And yet a
man who has learned melody and measure, will recognize a music in them
all. So it is with virtue, the music of the human soul. It differs in
differing races. But he who has learned to know what virtue is can
recognize its harmonies, wherever they be heard. And thus the soul
that fulfils its own notions of music, and carries them up to its idea
of excellence, is the master soul; and in the regions to which it goes,
when the breath leaves the lips, it pursues the same are set free from
the trammels that confined, and the false judgments that marred it here.
For then the soul is no longer Spartan, or Ionian, Lydian, Median, or
Scythian. Escaped into the upper air, it is the citizen of universal
freedom and universal light. And hence it does not live as a ghost in
gloomy shades, being merely a pale memory of things that have passed
away; but in its primitive being as an emanation from the one divine
principle which penetrates everywhere, vivifies all things, and enjoys
in all. This is what I weave together from the doctrines of varying
schools; schools that collect from the fields of thought flowers of
different kinds which conceal, by adorning it, the ligament that
unites them all: this, I say, O Pausanias, is my conception of the
soul."

Cleonice rose softly, and taking from her bosom a rose, kissed it
fervently, and laid it at the feet of the singer.

"Were this my soul," cried she, "I would ask thee to bind it in the
wreath."

Vague and troubled thoughts passed meanwhile through the mind of the
Heracleid; old ideas being disturbed and dislodged, the new ones did
not find easy settlement in a brain occupied with ambitious schemes
and a heart agitated by stormy passions. In much superstitious, in
much sceptical, as education had made him the one, and experience but
of worldly things was calculated to make him the other, he followed
not the wing of the philosophy which passed through heights not
occupied by Olympus, and dived into depths where no Tartarus echoed to
the wail of Cocytus.

After a pause he said in his perplexity,

"Well mayst thou own that no Delphian oracle tells thee all this. And
when thou speakest of the Divine Principle as One, dost thou not, O
presumptuous man, depopulate the Halls of Ida? Nay, is it not Zeus
himself whom thou dethronest; is not thy Divine Principle the Fate
which Zeus himself must obey?"

"There is a young man of Clazomenae," answered the singer, "named
Anaxagoras, who avoiding all active life, though of birth the noblest,
gives himself up to contemplation, and whom I have listened to in the
city as he passed through it, on his way into Egypt. And I heard
him say, 'Fate is an empty name.'[28] Fate is blind, the Divine is
All-seeing."

"How!" cried Cleonice. "An empty name--she! Necessity the
All-compelling."

The musician drew from the harp one of the most artful of Sappho's
exquisite melodies.

"What drew forth that music?" he asked, smiling. "My hand and my will
from a genius not present, not visible. Was that genius a blind fate?
no, it was a grand intelligence. Nature is to the Deity what my hand
and will are to the unseen genius of the musician. They obey an
intelligence and they form a music. If creation proceed from an
intelligence, what we call fate is but the consequence of its laws.
And Nature operates not in the external world alone, but in the core
of all life; therefore in the mind of man obeying only what some
supreme intelligence has placed there: therefore in man's mind
producing music or discord, according as he has learned the principles
of harmony, that is, of good. And there be sages who declare that
Intelligence and Love are the same. Yet," added the Mothon, with an
aspect solemnly compassionate, "not the love thou mockest by the name
of Aphrodite. No mortal eye hath ever seen that love within the known
sphere, yet all insensibly feel its reign. What keeps the world
together but affection? What makes the earth bring forth its fruits,
but the kindness which beams in the sunlight and descends in the dews?
What makes the lioness watch over her cubs, and the bird, with all air
for its wanderings, come back to the fledglings in its nest? Strike
love, the conjoiner, from creation, and creation returns to a void.
Destroy love the parental, and life is born but to perish. Where stop
the influence of love or how limit its multiform degrees? Love guards
the fatherland; crowns with turrets the walls of the freeman. What but
love binds the citizens of States together, and frames and heeds the
laws that submit individual liberty to the rule of the common good?
Love creates, love cements, love enters and harmonises all things. And
as like attracts like, so love attracts in the hereafter the loving
souls that conceived it here. From the region where it summons them,
its opposites are excluded. There ceases war; there ceases pain. There
indeed intermingle the beautiful and glorious, but beauty purified
from earthly sin, the glorious resting from earthly toil. Ask ye how
to know on earth where love is really presiding? Not in Paphos, not
in Amathus. Wherever thou seest beauty and good; wherever thou seest
life, and that life pervaded with faculties of joy, there thou seest
love; there thou shouldst recognize the Divinity."

"And where I see misery and hate," said the Spartan, "what should I
recognize there?"

"Master," returned the singer, "can the good come without a struggle?
Is the beautiful accomplished without strife? Recall the tales of
primeval chaos, when, as sang the Ascraean singer, love first darted
into the midst; imagine the heave and throe of joining elements;
conjure up the first living shapes, born of the fluctuating slime and
vapour. Surely they were things incomplete, deformed ghastly fragments
of being, as are the dreams of a maniac. Had creative Love stopped
there, and then, standing on the height of some fair completed world,
had viewed the warring portents, wouldst thou not have said--But these
are the works of Evil and Hate? Love did not stop there, it worked on;
and out of the chaos once ensouled, this glorious world swung itself
into ether, the completed sister of the stars. Again, O my listeners,
contemplate the sculptor, when the block from the granite shaft first
stands rude and shapeless before him. See him in his earlier strife
with the obstinate matter--how uncouth the first outline of limb and
feature; unlovelier often in the rugged commencements of shape, than
when the dumb mass stood shapeless. If the sculptor had stopped there,
the thing might serve as an image for the savage of an abominable
creed, engaged in the sacrifice of human flesh. But he pauses not, he
works on. Stroke by stroke comes from the stone a shape of more beauty
than man himself is endowed with, and in a human temple stands a
celestial image.

"Thus is it with the soul in the mundane sphere; it works its way on
through the adverse matter. We see its work half completed; we cry,
Lo, this is misery, this is hate--because the chaos is not yet a
perfected world, and the stone block is not yet a statue of Apollo.
But for that reason must we pause?--no, we must work on, till the
victory brings the repose.

"All things come into order from the war of contraries--the elements
fight and wrestle to produce the wild flower at our feet; from a wild
flower man hath striven and toiled to perfect the marvellous rose of
the hundred leaves. Hate is necessary for the energies of love, evil
for the activity of good; until, I say, the victory is won, until Hate
and Evil are subdued, as the sculptor subdues the stone; and then
rises the divine image serene for ever, and rests on its pedestal
in the Uranian Temple. Lift thine eyes; that temple is yonder. O
Pausanias, the sculptor's work-room is the earth."

Alcman paused, and sweeping his hand once more over his lyre, chanted
as follows:

    "Dewdrop that weepest on the sharp-barbd thorn,
     Why didst thou fall from Day's golden chalices?
        'My tears bathe the thorn,' said the Dewdrop,
        'To nourish the bloom of the rose.'

    "Soul of the Infant, why to calamity
     Comest thou wailing from the calm spirit-source?
        'Ask of the Dew,' said the Infant,
        'Why it descends on the thorn!'

    "Dewdrop from storm, and soul from calamity
     Vanish soon--whither? let the Dew answer thee;
        'Have not my tears been my glory?
        Tears drew me up to the sun.'

    "What were thine uses, that thou art glorified?
     What did thy tears give, profiting earth or sky?
        'There, to the thorn-stem a blossom,
        Here, to the Iris a tint.'"

Alcman had modulated the tones of his voice into a sweetness so
plaintive and touching, that, when he paused, the hand-maidens had
involuntarily risen and gathered round, hushed and noiseless. Cleonice
had lowered her veil over her face and bosom; but the heaving of
its tissue betrayed her half-suppressed, gentle sob; and the proud
mournfulness on the Spartan's swarthy countenance had given way to a
soft composure, melancholy still--but melancholy as a lulled, though
dark water, over which starlight steals through disparted cloud.

Cleonice was the first to break the spell which bound them all.

"I would go within," she murmured faintly.

"The sun, now slanting, strikes through the vine-leaves, and blinds me
with its glare."

Pausanias approached timidly, and taking her by the hand, drew her
aside, along one of the grassy alleys that stretched onwards to the
sea.

The handmaidens tarried behind to cluster nearer round the singer.
They forgot he was a slave.


Note:

[28] Anaxagoras was then between 20 and 30 years of age.--See Ritter,
vol. ii., for the sentiment here ascribed to him, and a general view
of his tenets.




CHAPTER II.


"Thou art weeping still, Cleonice!" said the Spartan, "and I have not
the privilege to kiss away thy tears."

"Nay, I weep not," answered the girl, throwing up her veil; and her
face was calm, if still sad--the tear yet on the eyelids, but the
smile upon the lip--[Greek: dakruoen gelaoisa]. "Thy singer has
learned his art from a teacher heavenlier than the Pierides, and its
name is Hope."

"But if I understand him aright," said Pausanias, "the Hope that
inspires him is a goddess who blesses us little on the earth."

As if the Mothon had overheard the Spartan, his voice here suddenly
rose behind them, singing:

    "_There_ the Beautiful and Glorious
    Intermingle evermore."

Involuntarily both turned. The Mothon seemed as if explaining to the
handmaids the allegory of his marriage song upon Helen and Achilles,
for his hand was raised on high, and again, with an emphasis, he
chanted:

    "There, throughout the Blessed Islands,
    And amid the Race of Light,
    Do the Beautiful and Glorious
    Intermingle evermore."

"Canst thou not wait, if thou so lovest me?' said Cleonice, with more
tenderness in her voice than it had ever yet betrayed to him; "life is
very short. Hush!" she continued, checking the passionate interruption
that burst from his lips; "I have something I would confide to thee:
listen. Know that in my childhood I had a dear friend, a maiden a few
years older than myself, and she had the divine gift of trance which
comes from Apollo. Often, gazing into space, her eyes became fixed,
and her frame still as a statue's; then a shiver seized her limbs, and
prophecy broke from her lips. And she told me, in one of these hours,
when, as she said, 'all space and all time seemed spread before her
like a sunlit ocean,' she told me of my future, so far as its leaves
have yet unfolded from the stem of my life. Spartan, she prophesied
that I should see thee--and--" Cleonice paused, blushing, and then
hurried on, "and she told me that suddenly her eye could follow my
fate on the earth no more, that it vanished out of the time and the
space on which it gazed, and saying it she wept, and broke into
funeral song. And therefore, Pausanias, I say life is very short for
me at least--"

"Hold," cried Pausanias; "torture not me, nor delude thyself with the
dreams of a raving girl. Lives she near? Let me visit her with thee,
and I will prove thy prophetess an impostor."

"They whom the Priesthood of Delphi employ throughout Hellas to find
the fit natures for a Pythoness heard of her, and heard herself. She
whom thou callest impostor gives the answer to perplexed nations from
the Pythian shrine. But wherefore doubt her?--where the sorrow? I feel
none. If love does rule the worlds beyond, and does unite souls who
love nobly here, yonder we shall meet, O descendant of Hercules, and
human laws will not part us there."

"Thou die! die before me! thou, scarcely half my years! And I be left
here, with no comfort but a singer's dreamy verse, not even mine
ambition! Thrones would vanish out of earth, and turn to cinders in
thine urn."

"Speak not of thrones," said Cleonice, with imploring softness, "for
the prophetess, too, spake of steps that went towards a throne, and
vanished at the threshold of darkness, beside which sate the Furies.
Speak not of thrones, dream but of glory and Hellas--of what thy soul
tells thee is that virtue which makes life an Uranian music, and thus
unites it to the eternal symphony, as the breath of the single flute
melts when it parts from the instrument into the great concord of the
choir. Knowest thou not that in the creed of the Persians each mortal
is watched on earth by a good spirit and an evil one? And they who
loved us below, or to whom we have done beneficent and gentle deeds,
if they go before us into death, pass to the side of the good spirit,
and strengthen him to save and to bless thee against the malice of the
bad, and the bad is strengthened in his turn by those whom we have
injured. Wouldst thou have all the Greeks whose birthright thou
wouldst barter, whose blood thou wouldst shed for barbaric aid to thy
solitary and lawless power, stand by the side of the evil Fiend?
And what could I do against so many? what could my soul do," added
Cleonice with simple pathos, "by the side of the kinder spirit?"

Pausanias was wholly subdued. He knelt to the girl, he kissed the hem
of her robe, and for the moment ambition, luxury, pomp, pride fled
from his soul, and left there only the grateful tenderness of the man,
and the lofty instincts of the hero. But just then--was it the evil
spirit that sent him?--the boughs of the vine were put aside, and
Gongylus the Eretrian stood before them. His black eyes glittered keen
upon Pausanias, who rose from his knee, startled and displeased.

"What brings thee hither, man?" said the Regent, haughtily.

"Danger," answered Gongylus, in a hissing whisper. "Lose not a
moment--come."

"Danger!" exclaimed Cleonice, tremblingly, and clasping her hands, and
all the human love at her heart was visible in her aspect. "Danger,
and to _him_!"

"Danger is but as the breeze of my native air," said the Spartan,
smiling; "thus I draw it in and thus breathe it away. I follow thee,
Gongylus. Take my greeting, Cleonice--the Good to the Beautiful. Well,
then, keep Alcman yet awhile to sing thy kind face to repose, and this
time let him tune his lyre to songs of a more Dorian strain--songs
that show what a Heracleid thinks of danger." He waved his hand, and
the two men, striding hastily, passed along the vine alley, darkened
its vista for a few minutes, then vanishing down the descent to the
beach, the wide blue sea again lay lone and still before the eyes of
the Byzantine maid.




Chapter III.


Pausanias and the Eretrian halted on the shore.

"Now speak," said the Spartan Regent. "Where is the danger?"

"Before thee," answered Gongylus, and his hand pointed to the ocean.

"I see the fleet of the Greeks in the harbour--I see the flag of
my galley above the forest of their masts. I see detached vessels
skimming along the waves hither and thither as in holiday and sport;
but discipline slackens where no foe dares to show himself. Eretrian,
I see no danger."

"Yet danger is there, and where danger is thou shouldst be. I have
learned from my spies, not an hour since, that there is a conspiracy
formed--a mutiny on the eve of an outburst. Thy place now should be in
thy galley."

"My boat waits yonder in that creek, overspread by the wild shrubs,"
answered Pausanias; "a few strokes of the oar, and I am where thou
seest. And in truth, without thy summons, I should have been on board
ere sunset, seeing that on the morrow I have ordered a general review
of the vessels of the fleet. Was that to be the occasion for the mutiny?"

"So it is supposed."

"I shall see the faces of the mutineers," said Pausanias, with a calm
visage, and an eye which seemed to brighten the very atmosphere. "Thou
shakest thy head; is this all?"

"Thou art not a bird--this moment in one place, that moment in
another. There, with yon armament, is the danger thou canst meet. But
yonder sails a danger which thou canst not, I fear me, overtake."

"Yonder!" said Pausanias, his eye following the hand of the Eretrian.
"I see naught save the white wing of a seagull--perchance, by its dip
into the water, it foretells a storm."

"Farther off than the seagull, and seeming smaller than the white spot
of its wing, seest thou nothing!"

"A dim speck on the farthest horizon, if mine eyes mistake not."

"The speck of a sail that is bound to Sparta, It carries with it a
request for thy recall."

This time the cheek of Pausanias paled, and his voice slightly
faltered as he said,

"Art thou sure of this?"

"So I hear that the Samian captain, Uliades, has boasted at noon in
the public baths."

"A Samian!--is it only a Samian who hath ventured to address to Sparta
a complaint of her General?"

"From what I could gather," replied Gongylus, "the complaint is
more powerfully backed. But I have not as yet heard more, though I
conjecture that Athens has not been silent, and before the vessel
sailed Ionian captains were seen to come with joyous faces from the
lodgings of Cimon."

The Regent's brow grew yet more troubled. "Cimon, of all the Greeks
out of Laconia, is the one whose word would weigh most in Sparta. But
my Spartans themselves are not suspected of privity and connivance in
this mission?"

"It is not said that they are."

Pausanias shaded his face with his hand for a moment in deep thought.
Gongylus continued--"If the Ephors recall thee before the Asian army
is on the frontier, farewell to the sovereignty of Hellas!"

"Ha!" cried Pausanias, "tempt me not. Thinkest thou I need other
tempter than I have here?"--smiting his breast.

Gongylus recoiled in surprise. "Pardon me, Pausanias, but temptation
is another word for hesitation. I dreamed not that I could tempt; I
did not know that thou didst hesitate."

The Spartan remained silent.

"Are not thy messengers on the road to the great king?--nay, perhaps
already they have reached him. Didst thou not say how intolerable to
thee would be life henceforth in the iron thraldom of Sparta--and
now?"

"And now--I forbid thee to question me more. Thou hast performed thy
task, leave me to mine."

He sprang with the spring of the mountain goat from the crag on which
he stood--over a precipitous chasm, lighted on a narrow ledge, from
which a slip of the foot would have been sure death, another bound yet
more fearful, and his whole weight hung suspended by the bough of the
ilex which he grasped with a single hand; then from bough to bough,
from crag to crag, the Eretrian saw him descending till he vanished
amidst the trees that darkened over the fissures at the foot of the
cliff.

And before Gongylus had recovered his amaze at the almost preterhuman
agility and vigour of the Spartan, and his dizzy sense at the
contemplation of such peril braved by another, a boat shot into the
sea from the green creek, and he saw Pausanias seated beside Lysander
on one of the benches, and conversing with him, as if in calm
earnestness, while the ten rowers sent the boat towards the fleet with
the swiftness of an arrow to its goal.

"Lysander," said Pausanias, "hast thou heard that the Ionians have
offered to me the insult of a mission to the Ephors demanding my
recall?"

"No. Who would tell me of insult to thee?"

"But hast thou any conjecture that other Spartans around me, and
who love me less than thou, would approve, nay, have approved, this
embassy of spies and malcontents?"

"I think none have so approved. I fear some would so approve. The
Spartans round thee would rejoice did they know that the pride of
their armies, the Victor of Plataea, were once more within their
walls."

"Even to the danger of Hellas from the Mede?"

"They would rather all Hellas were Medised than Pausanias the
Heracleid."

"Boy, boy," said Pausanias, between his ground teeth, "dost thou not
see that what is sought is the disgrace of Pausanias the Heracleid?
Grant that I am recalled from the head of this armament, and on the
charge of Ionians, and I am dishonoured in the eyes of all Greece.
Dost thou remember in the last Olympiad that when Themistocles, the
only rival now to me in glory, appeared on the Altis, assembled
Greece rose to greet and do him honour? And if I, deposed, dismissed,
appeared at the next Olympiad, how would assembled Greece receive
me? Couldst thou not see the pointed finger and hear the muttered
taunt--That is Pausanias, whom the Ionians banished from Byzantium.
No, I must abide here; I must prosecute the vast plans which shall
dwarf into shadow the petty genius of Themistocles. I must counteract
this mischievous embassy to the Ephors. I must send to them an
ambassador of my own. Lysander, wilt thou go, and burying in thy bosom
thine own Spartan prejudices, deem that thou canst only serve me by
proving the reasons why I should remain here; pleading for me, arguing
for me, and winning my suit?"

"It is for thee to command and for me to obey thee," answered
Lysander, simply. "Is not that the duty of soldier to chief? When
we converse as friends I may contend with thee in speech. When thou
sayest, Do this, I execute thine action. To reason with thee would be
revolt."

Pausanias placed his clasped hands on the young man's shoulder, and
leaving them there, impressively said--

"I select thee for this mission because thee alone can I trust. And of
me hast thou a doubt?--tell me."

"If I saw thee taking the Persian gold I should say that the Demon
had mocked mine eyes with a delusion. Never could I doubt,
unless--unless--"

"Unless what?"

'Thou wert standing under Jove's sky against the arms of Hellas."

"And then, if some other chief bade thee raise thy sword against me,
thou art Spartan and wouldst obey?"

"I am Spartan, and cannot believe that I should ever have a cause, or
listen to a command, to raise my sword against the chief I now serve
and love," replied Lysander.

Pausanias withdrew his hands from the young man's broad shoulder. He
felt humbled beside the quiet truth of that sublime soul. His own
deceit became more black to his conscience. "Methinks," he said
tremulously, "I will not send thee after all--and perhaps the news may
be false."

The boat had now gained the fleet, and steering amidst the crowded
triremes, made its way towards the floating banner of the Spartan
Serpent. More immediately round the General's galley were the vessels
of the Peloponnesian allies, by whom he was still honoured. A
welcoming shout rose from the seamen lounging on their decks as they
caught sight of the renowned Heracleid. Cimon, who was on his own
galley at some distance, heard the shout.

"So Pausanias," he said, turning to the officers round him, "has
deigned to come on board, to direct, I suppose, the manoeuvres for
to-morrow."

"I believe it is but the form of a review for manoeuvres," said
an Athenian officer, "in which Pausanias will inspect the various
divisions of the fleet, and if more be intended, will give the
requisite orders for a subsequent day. No arrangements demanding much
preparation can be anticipated, for Antagoras, the rich Chian, gives
a great banquet this day--a supper to the principal captains of the
Isles."

"A frank and hospitable reveller is Antagoras," answered Cimon. "He
would have extended his invitation to the Athenians--me included--but
in their name I declined."

"May I ask wherefore?" said the officer who had before spoken. "Cimon
is not held averse to wine-cup and myrtle-bough."

"But things are said over some wine-cups and under some
myrtle-boughs," answered Cimon, with a quiet laugh, "which it is
imprudence to hear and would be treason to repeat. Sup with me here on
deck, friends--a supper for sober companions--sober as the Laconian
Syssitia, and let not Spartans say that _our_ manners are spoilt by
the luxuries of Byzantium."




CHAPTER IV.


In an immense peristyle of a house which a Byzantine noble, ruined by
lavish extravagance, had been glad to cede to the accommodation of
Antagoras and other officers of Chios, the young rival of Pausanias
feasted the chiefs of the Aegean. However modern civilization may in
some things surpass the ancient, it is certainly not in luxury and
splendour. And although the Hellenic States had not, at that period,
aimed at the pomp of show and the refinements of voluptuous pleasure
which preceded their decline; and although they never did carry luxury
to the wondrous extent which it reached in Asia, or even in Sicily,
yet even at that time a wealthy sojourner in such a city as Byzantium
could command an entertainment that no monarch in our age would
venture to parade before royal guests, and submit to the criticism of
tax paying subjects.

The columns of the peristyle were of dazzling alabaster, with their
capitals richly gilt. The space above was roofless; but an immense
awning of purple, richly embroidered in Persian looms--a spoil of some
gorgeous Mede--shaded the feasters from the summer sky. The couches on
which the banqueters reclined were of citron wood, inlaid with ivory,
and covered with the tapestries of Asiatic looms. At the four corners
of the vast hall played four fountains, and their spray sparkled to a
blaze of light from colossal candelabra, in which burnt perfumed oil.
The guests were not assembled at a single table, but in small groups;
to each group its tripod of exquisite workmanship. To that feast
of fifty revellers no less than seventy cooks had contributed the
inventions of their art, but under one great master, to whose care
the banquet had been consigned by the liberal host, and who ransacked
earth, sky, and sea for dainties more various than this degenerate age
ever sees accumulated at a single board. And the epicure who has but
glanced over the elaborate page of Athenaeus, must own with melancholy
self-humiliation that the ancients must have carried the art of
flattering the palate to a perfection as absolute as the art which
built the Parthenon, and sculptured out of gold and ivory the Olympian
Jove. But the first course, with its profusion of birds, flesh, and
fishes, its marvellous combinations of forced meats, and inventive
poetry of sauces, was now over. And in the interval preceding that
second course, in which gastronomy put forth its most exquisite
masterpieces, the slaves began to remove the tables, soon to be
replaced. Vessels of fragrant waters, in which the banqueters dipped
their fingers, were handed round; perfumes, which the Byzantine marts
collected from every clime, escaped from their precious receptacles.

Then were distributed the garlands. With these each guest crowned
locks that steamed with odours; and in them were combined the flowers
that most charm the eye, with bud or herb that most guard from the
bead the fumes of wine: with hyacinth and flax, with golden asphodel
and silver lily, the green of ivy and parsley leaf was thus entwined;
and above all the rose, said to convey a delicious coolness to the
temples on which it bloomed. And now for the first time wine came to
heighten the spirits and test the charm of the garlands. Each, as the
large goblet passed to him, poured from the brim, before it touched
his lips, his libation to the good spirit. And as Antagoras, rising
first, set this pious example, out from the further ends of the
hall, behind the fountains, burst a concert of flutes, and the great
Hellenic Hymn of the Paean.

As this ceased, the fresh tables appeared before the banqueters,
covered with all the fruits in season, and with those triumphs in
confectionery, of which honey was the main ingredient, that well
justified the favour in which the Greeks held the bee.

Then, instead of the pure juice of the grape, from which the libation
had been poured, came the wines, mixed at least three parts with
water, and deliciously cooled.

Up again rose Antagoras, and every eye turned to him.

"Companions," said the young Chian, "it is not held in free States
well for a man to seize by himself upon supreme authority. We deem
that a magistracy should only be obtained by the votes of others.
Nevertheless, I venture to think that the latter plan does not always
ensure to us a good master. I believe it was by election that we
Greeks have given to ourselves a generalissimo, not contented, it
is said, to prove the invariable wisdom of that mode of government;
wherefore this seems an occasion to revive the good custom of tyranny.
And I propose to do so in my person by proclaiming myself Symposiarch
and absolute commander in the Commonwealth here assembled. But if ye
prefer the chance of the die--"

"No, no," cried the guests, almost universally; "Antagoras, the
Symposiarch, we submit. Issue thy laws."

"Hearken then, and obey. First, then, as to the strength of the wine.
Behold the crater in which there are three Naiades to one Dionysos. He
is a match for them; not for more. No man shall put into his wine more
water than the slaves have mixed. Yet if any man is so diffident of
the god that he thinks three Naiades too much for him, he may omit one
or two, and let the wine and the water fight it out upon equal terms.
So much for the quality of the drink. As to quantity, it is a question
to be deliberated hereafter. And now this cup to Zeus the Preserver."

The toast went round.

"Music, and the music of Lydia!" then shouted Antagoras, and resumed
his place on the couch beside Uliades.

The music proceeded, the wines circled.

"Friend," whispered Uliades to the host, "thy father left thee wines,
I know. But if thou givest many banquets like this, I doubt if thou
wilt leave wines to thy son."

"I shall die childless, perhaps," answered the Chian; "and any friend
will give me enough to pay Charon's fee across the Styx."

"That is a melancholy reflection," said Uliades, "and there is no
subject of talk that pleases me less than that same Styx. Why dost
thou bite thy lip, and choke the sigh? By the Gods! art thou not
happy?"

"Happy!" repeated Antagoras, with a bitter smile. "Oh, yes!"

"Good! Cleonice torments thee no more. I myself have gone through thy
trials; ay, and oftentimes. Seven times at Samos, five at Rhodes,
once at Miletus, and forty-three times at Corinth, have I been an
impassioned and unsuccessful lover. Courage; I love still."

Antagoras turned away. By this time the hall was yet more crowded,
for many not invited to the supper came, as was the custom with the
Greeks, to the Symposium; but these were all of the Ionian race.

"The music is dull without the dancers," cried the host. "Ho, there!
the dancing girls. Now would I give all the rest of my wealth to see
among these girls one face that yet but for a moment could make me
forget--" "Forget what, or whom?" said Uliades; "not Cleonice?"

"Man, man, wilt thou provoke me to strangle thee?" muttered
Antagoras.

Uliades edged himself away.

"Ungrateful!" he cried. "What are a hundred Byzantine girls to one
tried male friend?"

"I will not be ungrateful, Uliades, if thou stand by my side against
the Spartan."

"Thou art, then, bent upon this perilous hazard?"

"Bent on driving Pausanias from Byzantium, or into Hades--yes."

"Touch!" said Uliades, holding out his right hand. "By Cypris, but
these girls dance like the daughters of Oceanus; every step undulates
as a wave."

Antagoras motioned to his cup-bearer. "Tell the leader of that dancing
choir to come hither." The cupbearer obeyed.

A man with a solemn air came to the foot of the Chian's couch, bowing
low. He was an Egyptian--one of the meanest castes.

"Swarthy friend," said Antagoras, "didst thou ever hear of the Pyrrhic
dance of the Spartans?"

"Surely, of all dances am I teacher and preceptor."

"Your girls know it, then?"

"Somewhat, from having seen it; but not from practice. 'Tis a male
dance and a warlike dance, O magnanimous, but, in this instance,
untutored, Chian!"

"Hist, and listen." Antagoras whispered. The Egyptian nodded his head,
returned to the dancing girls, and when their measure had ceased,
gathered them round him.

Antagoras again rose.

"Companions, we are bound now to do homage to our masters--the
pleasant, affable and familiar warriors of Sparta."

At this the guests gave way to their applauding laughter.

"And therefore these delicate maidens will present to us that flowing
and Amathusian dance, which the Graces taught to Spartan sinews. Ho,
there! begin."

The Egyptian had by this time told the dancers what they were expected
to do; and they came forward with an affectation of stern dignity, the
burlesque humour of which delighted all those lively revellers. And
when with adroit mimicry their slight arms and mincing steps mocked
that grand and masculine measure so associated with images of Spartan
austerity and decorum, the exhibition became so humorously ludicrous,
that perhaps a Spartan himself would have been compelled to laugh at
it. But the merriment rose to its height, when the Egyptian, who had
withdrawn for a few minutes, reappeared with a Median robe and mitred
cap, and calling out in his barbarous African accent, "Way for the
conqueror!" threw into his mien and gestures all the likeness to
Pausanias himself, which a practised mime and posture-master could
attain. The laughter of Antagoras alone was not loud--it was low and
sullen, as if sobs of rage were stifling it; but his eye watched the
effect produced, and it answered the end he had in view.

As the dancers now, while the laughter was at its loudest roar,
vanished behind the draperies, the host rose, and his countenance was
severe and grave--

"Companions, one cup more, and let it be to Harmodius and Aristogiton.
Let the song in their honour come only from the lips of free citizens,
of our Ionian comrades. Uliades, begin. I pass to thee a myrtle bough;
and under it I pass a sword."

Then he began the famous hymn ascribed to Callistratus, commencing
with a clear and sonorous voice, and the guests repeating each stanza
after him with the enthusiasm which the words usually produced among
the Hellenic republicans:

    I in a myrtle bough the sword will carry,
    As did Harmodius and Aristogiton;
    When they the tyrant slew,
    And back to Athens gave her equal laws.

    Thou art in nowise dead, best-loved Harmodius;
    Isles of the Blessed are, they say, thy dwelling,
    There swift Achilles dwells,
    And there, they say, with thee dwells Diomed.

    I in a myrtle bough the sword will carry,
    As did Harmodius and Aristogiton,
    When to Athene's shrine
    They gave their sacrifice--a tyrant man.

    Ever on earth for both of you lives glory,
    O loved Harmodius, loved Aristogiton,
    For ye the tyrant slew,
    And back to Athens ye gave equal laws.

When the song had ceased, the dancers, the musicians, the attendant
slaves had withdrawn from the hall, dismissed by a whispered order
from Antagoras.

He, now standing up, took from his brows the floral crown, and first
sprinkling them with wine, replaced the flowers by a wreath of
poplar. The assembly, a little while before so noisy, was hushed into
attentive and earnest silence. The action of Antagoras, the expression
of his countenance, the exclusion of the slaves, prepared all present
for something more than the convivial address of a Symposiarch.

"Men and Greeks," said the Chian, "on the evening before Teucer led
his comrades in exile over the wide waters to found a second Salamis,
he sprinkled his forehead with Lyaean dews, being crowned with the
poplar leaves--emblems of hardihood and contest; and, this done, he
invited his companions to dispel their cares for the night, that their
hearts might with more cheerful hope and bolder courage meet what the
morrow might bring to them on the ocean. I imitate the ancient hero,
in honour less of him than of the name of Salamis. We, too, have a
Salamis to remember, and a second Salamis to found. Can ye forget
that, had the advice of the Spartan leader Eurybiades been adopted,
the victory of Salamis would never have been achieved? He was for
retreat to the Isthmus; he was for defending the Peloponnese, because
in the Peloponnesus was the unsocial selfish Sparta, and leaving the
rest of Hellas to the armament of Xerxes. Themistocles spoke against
the ignoble counsel; the Spartan raised his staff to strike him. Ye
know the Spartan manners. 'Strike if you will, but hear me,' cried
Themistocles. He was heard, Xerxes was defeated, and Hellas saved.
"I am not Themistocles; nor is there a Spartan staff to silence free
lips. But I too say, Hear me! for a new Salamis is to be won. What
was the former Salamis?--the victory that secured independence to the
Greeks, and delivered them from the Mede and the Medising traitors.
Again we must fight a Salamis. Where, ye say, is the Mede?--not at
Byzantium, it is true, in person; but the Medising traitor is here."

A profound sensation thrilled through the assembly.

"Enough of humility do the maritime Ionians practise when they accept
the hegemony of a Spartan landsman; enough of submission do the free
citizens of Hellas show when they suffer the imperious Dorian to
sentence them to punishments only fit for slaves. But when the Spartan
appears in the robes of the Mede, when the imperious Dorian places in
the government of a city, which our joint arms now occupy, a recreant
who has changed an Eretrian birthright for a Persian satrapy; when
prisoners, made by the valour of all Hellas, mysteriously escape the
care of the Lacedaemonian, who wears their garb, and imitates their
manners--say, O ye Greeks, O ye warriors, if there is no second
Salamis to conquer!"

The animated words, and the wine already drunk, produced on the
banqueters an effect sudden, electrical, universal. They had come to
the hall gay revellers; they were prepared to leave the hall stern
conspirators.

Their hoarse murmur was as the voice of the sea before a storm.

Antagoras surveyed them with a fierce joy, and, with a change of tone,
thus continued: "Ye understand me, ye know already that a delivery
is to be achieved. I pass on: I submit to your wisdom the mode of
achieving it. While I speak, a swift-sailing vessel bears to Sparta
the complaints of myself, of Uliades, and of many Ionian captains here
present, against the Spartan general. And although the Athenian chiefs
decline to proffer complaints of their own, lest their State, which has
risked so much for the common cause, be suspected of using the
admiration it excites for the purpose of subserving its ambition, yet
Cimon, the young son of the great Miltiades, who has ties of friendship
and hospitality with families of high mark in Sparta, has been persuaded
to add to our public statement a private letter to the effect, that
speaking for himself, not in the name of Athens, he deems our complaints
justly founded, and the recall of Pausanias expedient for the discipline
of the armament. But can we say what effect this embassy may have upon a
sullen and haughty government; against, too, a royal descendant of
Hercules; against the general who at Plataea flattered Sparta with a
renown to which her absence from Marathon, and her meditated flight from
Salamis, gave but disputable pretensions?"

"And," interrupted Uliades, rising, "and--if, O Antagoras, I may crave
pardon for standing a moment between thee and thy guests--and this is
not all, for even if they recall Pausanias, they may send us another
general as bad, and without the fame which somewhat reconciles our
Ionian pride to the hegemony of a Dorian. Now, whatever my quarrel
with Pausanias, I am less against a man than a principle. I am a
seaman, and against the principle of having for the commander of the
Greek fleet a Spartan who does not know how to handle a sail. I am an
Ionian, and against the principle of placing the Ionian race under the
imperious domination of a Dorian. Therefore I say, now is the moment
to emancipate our blood and our ocean--the one from an alien, the
other from a landsman. And the hegemony of the Spartan should pass
away."

Uliades sat down with an applause more clamorous than had greeted the
eloquence of Antagoras, for the pride of race and of special calling
is ever more strong in its impulses than hatred to a single man. And
despite of all that could be said against Pausanias, still these
warriors felt awe for his greatness, and remembered that at Plataea,
where all were brave, he had been proclaimed the bravest.

Antagoras, with the quickness of a republican Greek, trained from
earliest youth to sympathy with popular assemblies, saw that Uliades
had touched the right key, and swallowed down with a passionate gulp
his personal wrath against his rival, which might otherwise have been
carried too far, and have lost him the advantage he had gained.

"Rightly and wisely speaks Uliades," said he. "Our cause is that of
our whole race; and clear has that true Samian made it to you all, O
Ionians and captains of the seas, that we must not wait for the lordly
answer Sparta may return to our embassage. Ye know that while night
lasts we must return to our several vessels; an hour more, and we
shall be on deck. To-morrow Pausanias reviews the fleet, and we may be
some days before we return to land, and can meet in concert. Whether
to-morrow or later the occasion for action may present itself, is a
question I would pray you to leave to those whom you entrust with the
discretionary power to act."

"How act?" cried a Lesbian officer.

"Thus would I suggest," said Antagoras, with well dissembled humility;
"let the captains of one or more Ionian vessels perform such a deed of
open defiance against Pausanias as leaves to them no option between
death and success; having so done, hoist a signal, and sailing at once
to the Athenian ships, place themselves under the Athenian leader; all
the rest of the Ionian captains will then follow their example. And
then, too numerous and too powerful to be punished for a revolt, we
shall proclaim a revolution, and declare that we will all sail back
to our native havens unless we have the liberty of choosing our own
hegemon."

"But," said the Lesbian who had before spoken, "the Athenians as yet
have held back and declined our overtures, and without them we are not
strong enough to cope with the Peloponnesian allies."

"The Athenians will be compelled to protect the Ionians, if the
Ionians in sufficient force demand it," said Uliades. "For as we are
nought without them, they are nought without us. Take the course
suggested by Antagoras: I advise it. Ye know me, a plain man, but
I speak not without warrant. And before the Spartans can either
contemptuously dismiss our embassy or send us out another general, the
Ionian will be the mistress of the Hellenic seas, and Sparta, the land
of oligarchies, will no more have the power to oligarchize democracy.
Otherwise, believe me, that power she has now from her hegemony, and
that power, whenever it suit her, she will use."

Uliades was chiefly popular in the fleet as a rough good seaman, as a
blunt and somewhat vulgar humourist. But whenever he gave advice, the
advice carried with it a weight not always bestowed upon superior
genius, because from the very commonness of his nature, he reached at
the common sense and the common feelings of those whom he addressed.
He spoke, in short, what an ordinary man thought and felt. He was a
practical man, brave but not over-audacious, not likely to run himself
or others into idle dangers, and when he said he had a warrant for
his advice, he was believed to speak from his knowledge of the course
which the Athenian chiefs, Aristides and Cimon, would pursue if the
plan recommended were actively executed.

"I am convinced," said the Lesbian. "And since all are grateful to
Athens for that final stand against the Mede, to which all Greece owes
her liberties, and since the chief of her armaments here is a man of
so modest a virtue, and so clement a justice, as we all acknowledge
in Aristides, fitting is it for us Ionians to constitute Athens the
maritime sovereign of our race."

"Are ye all of that mind?" cried Antagoras, and was answered by the
universal shout, "We are---all!" or if the shout was not universal,
none heeded the few whom fear or prudence might keep silent. "All that
remains then is to appoint the captain who shall hazard the first
danger and make the first signal. For my part, as one of the electors,
I give my vote for Uliades, and this is my ballot." He took from his
temples the poplar wreath, and cast it into a silver vase on the
tripod placed before him.

"Uliades by acclamation!" cried several voices.

"I accept," said the Ionian, "and as Ulysses, a prudent man, asked for
a colleague in enterprises of danger, so I ask for a companion in the
hazard I undertake, and I select Antagoras."

This choice received the same applauding acquiescence as that which
had greeted the nomination of the Ionian.

And in the midst of the applause was heard without the sharp shrill
sound of the Phrygian pipe.

"Comrades," said Antagoras, "ye hear the summons to our ships? Our
boats are waiting at the steps of the quay, by the Temple of Neptune.
Two sentences more, and then to sea. First, silence and fidelity;
the finger to the lip, the right hand raised to Zeus Horkios. For a
pledge, here is an oath. Secondly, be this the signal: whenever ye
shall see Uliades and myself steer our triremes out of the line in
which they may be marshalled, look forth and watch breathless, and the
instant you perceive that beside our flags of Samos and Chios we hoist
the ensign of Athens, draw off from your stations, and follow the wake
of our keels, to the Athenian navy. Then, as the Gods direct us. Hark,
a second time shrills the fife."





CHAPTER V


At the very hour when the Ionian captains were hurrying towards their
boats, Pausanias was pacing his decks alone, with irregular strides,
and through the cordage and the masts the starshine came fitfully on
his troubled features. Long undecided he paused, as the waves sparkled
to the stroke of oars, and beheld the boats of the feasters making
towards the division of the fleet in which lay the navy of the isles.
Farther on, remote and still, anchored the ships of Athens. He
clenched his hand, and turned from the sight.

"To lose an empire," he muttered, "and without a struggle; an empire
over yon mutinous rivals, over yon happy and envied Athens: an
empire--where its limits?--if Asia puts her armies to my lead, why
should not Asia be Hellenized, rather than Hellas be within the
tribute of the Mede? Dull--dull stolid Sparta! methinks I could
pardon the slavery thou inflictest on my life, didst thou but leave
unshackled my intelligence. But each vast scheme to be thwarted, every
thought for thine own aggrandisement beyond thy barren rocks, met and
inexorably baffled by a selfish aphorism, a cramping saw--'Sparta is
wide eno' for Spartans.'--'Ocean is the element of the fickle.'--'What
matters the ascendancy of Athens?--it does not cross the
Isthmus.'--'Venture nothing where I want nothing.' Why, this is the
soul's prison! Ah, had I been born Athenian, I had never uttered a
thought against my country. She and I would have expanded and aspired
together."

Thus arguing with himself, he at length confirmed his resolve, and
with a steadfast step entered his pavilion. There, not on broidered
cushions, but by preference on the hard floor, without coverlid, lay
Lysander calmly sleeping, his crimson warlike cloak, weather-stained,
partially wrapt around him; no pillow to his head but his own right
arm.

By the light of the high lamp that stood within the pavilion,
Pausanias contemplated the slumberer.

"He says he loves me, and yet can sleep," he murmured bitterly. Then
seating himself before a table he began to write, with slowness and
precision, whether as one not accustomed to the task or weighing every
word.

When he had concluded, he again turned his eyes to the sleeper. "How
tranquil! Was, my sleep ever as serene? I will not disturb him to the
last."

The fold of the curtain was drawn aside, and Alcman entered
noiselessly.

"Thou hast obeyed?" whispered Pausanias.

"Yes; the ship is ready, the wind favours. Hast thou decided?"

"I have," said Pausanias, with compressed lips.

He rose, and touched Lysander, lightly, but the touch sufficed;
the sleeper woke on the instant, casting aside slumber easily as a
garment.

"My Pausanias," said the young Spartan, "I am at thine orders--shall I
go? Alas! I read thine eye, and I shall leave thee in peril."

"Greater peril in the council of the Ephors and in the babbling lips
of the hoary Gerontes, than amidst the meeting of armaments. Thou wilt
take this letter to the Ephors. I have said in it but little; I have
said that I confide my cause to thee. Remember that thou insist on
the disgrace to me--the Heracleid, and through me to Sparta, that
my recall would occasion; remember that thou prove that my alleged
harshness is but necessary to the discipline that preserves armies,
and to the ascendancy of Spartan rule. And as to the idle tale of
Persian prisoners escaped, why thou knowest how even the Ionians could
make nothing of that charge. Crowd all sail, strain every oar, no ship
in the fleet so swift as that which bears thee. I care not for the few
hours' start the talebearers have. Our Spartan forms are slow; they
can scarce have an audience ere thou reach. The Gods speed and guard
thee, beloved friend. With thee goes all the future of Pausanias."

Lysander grasped his hand in a silence more eloquent than words, and
a tear fell on that hand which he clasped. "Be not ashamed of it," he
said then, as he turned away, and, wrapping his cloak round his face,
left the pavilion. Alcman followed, lowered a boat from the side, and
in a few moments the Spartan and the Mothon were on the sea. The boat
made to a vessel close at hand--a vessel builded in Cyprus, manned by
Bithynians; its sails were all up, but it bore no flag. Scarcely had
Lysander climbed the deck than it heaved to and fro, swaying as the
anchor was drawn up, then, righting itself, sprang forward, like a
hound unleashed for the chase. Pausanias with folded arms stood on the
deck of his own vessel, gazing after it, gazing long, till shooting
far beyond the fleet, far towards the melting line between sea and
sky, it grew less and lesser, and as the twilight dawned, it had faded
into space.

The Heracleid turned to Alcman, who, after he had conveyed Lysander to
the ship, had regained his master's side.

"What thinkest thou, Alcman, will be the result of all this?"

"The emancipation of the Helots," said the Mothon quietly. "The
Athenians are too near thee, the Persians are too far. Wouldst thou
have armies Sparta can neither give nor take away from thee, bind to
thee a race by the strongest of human ties--make them see in thy power
the necessary condition of their freedom."

Pausanias made no answer. He turned within his pavilion, and flinging
himself down on the same spot from which he had disturbed Lysander,
said, "Sleep here was so kind to him that it may linger where he left
it. I have two hours yet for oblivion before the sun rise."




CHAPTER VI.


If we were enabled minutely to examine the mental organization of men
who have risked great dangers, whether by the impulse of virtue, or
in the perpetration of crime, we should probably find therein a large
preponderance of hope. By that preponderance we should account for
those heroic designs which would annihilate prudence as a calculator,
did not a sanguine confidence in the results produce special energies
to achieve them, and thus create a prudence of its own, being as it
were the self-conscious admeasurement of the diviner strength which
justified the preterhuman spring. Nor less should we account by the
same cause for that audacity which startles us in criminals on a
colossal scale, which blinds them to the risks of detection, and often
at the bar of justice, while the evidences that ensure condemnation
are thickening round them, with the persuasion of acquittal or escape.
Hope is thus alike the sublime inspirer or the arch corrupter; it is
the foe of terror, the defier of consequences, the buoyant gamester
which at every loss doubles the stakes, with a firm hand rattles the
dice, and, invoking ruin, cries within itself, "How shall I expend the
gain?"

In the character, therefore, of a man like Pausanias, risking so
much glory, daring so much peril, strong indeed must have been this
sanguine motive power of human action. Nor is a large and active
development of hope incompatible with a temperament habitually grave
and often profoundly melancholy. For hope itself is often engendered
by discontent. A vigorous nature keenly susceptible to joy, and
deprived of the possession of the joy it yearns for by circumstances
that surround it in the present, is goaded on by its impatience
and dissatisfaction; it hopes for the something it has not got,
indifferent to the things it possesses, and saddened by the want which
it experiences. And therefore it has been well said by philosophers,
that real happiness would exclude desire; in other words, not only at
the gates of hell, but at the porch of heaven, he who entered would
leave hope behind him. For perfect bliss is but supreme content. And
if content could say to itself,--"But I hope for something more," it
would destroy its own existence.

From his brief slumber the Spartan rose refreshed. The trumpets were
sounding near him, and the very sound brightened his aspect, and
animated his spirits.

Agreeably to orders he had given the night before, the anchor was
raised, the rowers were on their benches, the libation to the Carnean
Apollo, under whose special protection the ship was placed, had been
poured forth, and with the rising sea and to the blare of trumpets the
gorgeous trireme moved forth from the bay.

It moved, as the trumpets ceased, to the note of a sweeter, but not
less exciting music. For, according to Hellenic custom, to the rowers
was allotted a musician, with whose harmony their oars, when first
putting forth to sea, kept time. And on this occasion Alcman
superseded the wonted performer by his own more popular song and the
melody of his richer voice. Standing by the mainmast, and holding
the large harp, which was stricken by the quill, its strings being
deepened by a sounding-board, he chanted an Io Paean to the Dorian god
of light and poesy. The harp at stated intervals was supported by a
burst of flutes, and the burthen of the verse was caught up by the
rowers as in chorus. Thus, far and wide over the shining waves, went
forth the hymn.

    Io, Io Paean! slowly. Song and oar must chime together:
    Io, Io Paean! by what title call Apollo!
      Clarian? Xanthian? Bodromian?
      Countless are thy names, Apollo,
        Io Carne! Io Carne!
        By the margent of Eurotas,
        'Neath the shadows of Tygetus,
        Thee the sons of Lacedaemon
        Name Carneus. Io, Io!
          Io Carne! Io Carne!

    Io, Io Paean! quicker. Song and voice must chime together:
    Io Paean! Io Paean! King Apollo, Io, Io!
    Io Carne!
      For thine altars do the seasons

      Paint the tributary flowers,
      Spring thy hyacinth restores,
      Summer greets thee with the rose,
      Autumn the blue Cyane mingles
      With the coronals of corn,
      And in every wreath thy laurel
      Weaves its everlasting green.
        Io Carne! Io Carne!
        For the brows Apollo favours
        Spring and winter does the laurel
        Weave its everlasting green.

    Io, Io Paean! louder. Voice and oar must chime together:
        For the brows Apollo favours
        Even Ocean bears the laurel.
          Io Carne! Io Carne!

    Io, Io Paean! stronger. Strong are those who win the laurel.

As the ship of the Spartan commander thus bore out to sea, the other
vessels of the armament had been gradually forming themselves into a
crescent, preserving still the order in which the allies maintained
their several contributions to the fleet, the Athenian ships at the
extreme end occupying the right wing, the Peloponnesians massed
together at the left.

The Chian galleys adjoined the Samian; for Uliades and Antagoras had
contrived that their ships should be close to each other, so that they
might take counsel at any moment and act in concert.

And now when the fleet had thus opened its arms as it were to receive
the commander, the great trireme of Pausanias began to veer round, and
to approach the half moon of the expanded armament. On it came, with
its beaked prow, like a falcon swooping down on some array of the
lesser birds.

From the stern hung a gilded shield and a crimson pennon. The
heavy-armed soldiers in their Spartan mail occupied the centre of the
vessel, and the sun shone full upon their armour.

"By Pallas the guardian," said Cimon, "it is the Athenian vessels that
the strategus honours with his first visit."

And indeed the Spartan galley now came alongside that of Aristides,
the admiral of the Athenian navy.

The soldiers on board the former gave way on either side. And a murmur
of admiration circled through the Athenian ship, as Pausanias
suddenly appeared. For, as if bent that day on either awing mutiny or
conciliating the discontented, the Spartan chief had wisely laid aside
the wondrous Median robes. He stood on her stern in the armour he had
worn at Plataea, resting one hand upon his shield, which itself rested
on the deck. His head alone was uncovered, his long sable locks
gathered up into a knot, in the Spartan fashion, a crest as it were
in itself to that lofty head. And so imposing were his whole air and
carriage, that Cimon, gazing at him, muttered, "What profane hand will
dare to rob that demigod of command?"




CHAPTER VII


Pausanias came on board the vessel of the Athenian admiral, attended
by the five Spartan chiefs who have been mentioned before as the
warlike companions assigned to him. He relaxed the haughty demeanour
which had given so much displeasure, adopting a tone of marked
courtesy. He spoke with high and merited praise of the seaman-like
appearance of the Athenian crews, and the admirable build and
equipment of their vessels.

"Pity only," said he, smiling, "that we have no Persians on the ocean
now, and that instead of their visiting us we must go in search of
them."

"Would that be wise on our part?" said Aristides. "Is not Greece large
enough for Greeks?"

"Greece has not done growing," answered the Spartan; "and the Gods
forbid that she should do so. When man ceases to grow in height he
expands in bulk; when he stops there too, the frame begins to stoop,
the muscles to shrink, the skin to shrivel, and decrepit old age
steals on. I have heard it said of the Athenians that they think
nothing done while aught remains to do. Is it not truly said, worthy
son of Miltiades?"

Cimon bowed his head. "General, I cannot disavow the sentiment. But if
Greece entered Asia, would it not be as a river that runs into a sea?
it expands, and is merged."

"The river, Cimon, may lose the sweetness of its wave and take the
brine of the sea. But the Greek can never lose the flavour of the
Greek genius, and could he penetrate the universe, the universe would
be Hellenized. But if, O Athenian chiefs, ye judge that we have now
done all that is needful to protect Athens, and awe the Barbarian, ye
must be longing to retire from the armament and return to your homes."

"When it is fit that we should return, we shall be recalled," said
Aristides quietly.

"What, is your State so unerring in its judgment? Experience does not
permit me to think so, for it ostracised Aristides."

"An honour," replied the Athenian, "that I did not deserve, but an
action that, had I been the adviser of those who sent me forth, I
should have opposed as too lenient. Instead of ostracising me, they
should have cast both myself and Themistocles into the Barathrum."

"You speak with true Attic honour, and I comprehend that where, in
commonwealths constituted like yours, party runs high, and the State
itself is shaken, ostracism may be a necessary tribute to the very
virtues that attract the zeal of a party and imperil the equality ye
so prize. But what can compensate to a State for the evil of depriving
itself of its greatest citizens?"

"Peace and freedom," said Aristides. "If you would have the young
trees thrive you must not let one tree be so large as to overshadow
them. Ah, general at Plataea," added the Athenian, in a benignant
whisper, for the grand image before him moved his heart with a mingled
feeling of generous admiration and prophetic pity, "ah, pardon me if I
remind thee of the ring of Polycrates, and say that Fortune is a queen
that requires tribute. Man should tremble most when most seemingly
fortune-favoured, and guard most against a fall when his rise is at
the highest."

"But it is only at its highest flight that the eagle is safe from the
arrow," answered Pausanias.

"And the nest the eagle has forgotten in her soaring is the more
exposed to the spoiler."

"Well, my nest is in rocky Sparta; hardy the spoiler who ventures
thither. Yet, to descend from these speculative comparisons, it seems
that thou hast a friendly and meaning purpose in thy warnings. Thou
knowest that there are in this armament men who grudge to me whatever
I now owe to Fortune, who would topple me from the height to which I
did not climb, but was led by the congregated Greeks, and who, while
perhaps they are forging arrowheads for the eagle, have sent to place
poison and a snare in its distant nest. So the Nausicaa is on
its voyage to Sparta, conveying to the Ephors complaints against
me--complaints from men who fought by my side against the Mede."

"I have heard that a Cyprian vessel left the fleet yesterday, bound
to Laconia. I have heard that it does bear men charged by some of the
Ionians with representations unfavourable to the continuance of thy
command. It bears none from me as the Nauarchus of the Athenians.
But--"

"But--what?"

"But I have complained to thyself, Pausanias, in vain."

"Hast thou complained of late, and in vain?"

"Nay."

"Honest men may err; if they amend, do just men continue to accuse?"

"I do not accuse, Pausanias, I but imply that those who do may have a
cause, but it will be heard before a tribunal of thine own countrymen,
and doubtless thou hast sent to the tribunal those who may meet the
charge on thy behalf."

"Well," said Pausanias, still preserving his studied urbanity and
lofty smile, "even Agamemnon and Achilles quarrelled, but Greece took
Troy not the less. And at least, since Aristides does not denounce me,
if I have committed even worse faults than Agamemnon, I have not made
an enemy of Achilles. And if," he added after a pause, "if some of
these Ionians, not waiting for the return of their envoys, openly
mutiny, they must be treated as Thersites was." Then he hurried
on quickly, for observing that Cimon's brow lowered, and his lips
quivered, he desired to cut off all words that might lead to
altercation.

"But I have a request to ask of the Athenian Nauarchus. Will you
gratify myself and the fleet by putting your Athenian triremes into
play? Your seamen are so famous for their manoeuvres, that they might
furnish us with sports of more grace and agility than do the Lydian
dancers. Landsman though I be, no sight more glads mine eye, than
these sea lions of pine and brass, bounding under the yoke of their
tamers. I presume not to give thee instructions what to perform. Who
can dictate to the seamen of Salamis? But when your ships have
played out their martial sport, let them exchange stations with the
Peloponnesian vessels, and occupy for the present the left of the
armament. Ye object not?"

"Place us where thou wilt, as was said to thee at Plataea," answered
Aristides.

"I now leave ye to prepare, Athenians, and greet ye, saying, the Good
to the Beautiful" "A wondrous presence for a Greek commander!" said
Cimon, as Pausanias again stood on the stern of his own vessel, which
moved off towards the ships of the islands.

"And no mean capacity," returned Aristides. "See you not his object in
transplacing us?"

"Ha, truly; in case of mutiny on board the Ionian ships, he separates
them from Athens. But woe to him if he thinks in his heart that an
Ionian is a Thersites, to be silenced by the blow of a sceptre.
Meanwhile let the Greeks see what manner of seamen are the Athenians.
Methinks this game ordained to us is a contest before Neptune, and for
a crown."

Pausanias bore right on towards the vessels from the Aegaean Isles.
Their masts and prows were heavy with garlands, but no music sounded
from their decks, no welcoming shout from their crews.

"Son of Cleombrotus," said the prudent Erasinidas, "sullen dogs bite.
Unwise the stranger who trusts himself to their kennel. Pass not to
those triremes; let the captains, if thou wantest them, come to thee."

Pausanias replied, "Dogs fear the steady eye and spring at the
recreant back. Helmsman, steer to yonder ship with the olive tree on
the Parasemon, and the image of Bacchus on the guardian standard. It
is the ship of Antagoras the Chian captain."

Pausanias turned to his warlike Five. "This time, forgive me, I go
alone." And before their natural Spartan slowness enabled them to
combat this resolution, their leader was by the side of his rival,
alone in the Chian vessel, and surrounded by his sworn foes.

"Antagoras," said the Spartan, "a Chian seaman's ship is his dearest
home. I stand on thy deck as at thy hearth, and ask thy hospitality; a
crust of thy honied bread, and a cup of thy Chian wine. For from
thy ship I would see the Athenian vessels go through their nautical
gymnastics."

The Chian turned pale and trembled; his vengeance was braved and
foiled. He was powerless against the man who trusted to his honour,
and asked to break of his bread and eat of his cup. Pausanias did not
appear to heed the embarrassment of his unwilling host, but turning
round, addressed some careless words to the soldiers on the raised
central platform, and then quietly seated himself, directing his eyes
towards the Athenian ships Upon these all the sails were now lowered.
In nice manoeuvres the seamen preferred trusting to their oars.
Presently one vessel started forth, and with a swiftness that seemed
to increase at every stroke.

A table was brought upon deck and placed before Pausanias, and the
slaves began to serve to him such light food as sufficed to furnish
the customary meal of the Greeks in the earlier forenoon.

"But where is mine host?" asked the Spartan. "Does Antagoras himself
not deign to share a meal with his guest?"

On receiving the message, Antagoras had no option but to come forward.
The Spartan eyed him deliberately, and the young Chian felt with
secret rage the magic of that commanding eye.

Pausanias motioned to him to be seated, making room beside himself.
The Chian silently obeyed.

"Antagoras," said the Spartan in a low voice, "thou art doubtless one
of those who have already infringed the laws of military discipline
and obedience. Interrupt me not yet. A vessel without waiting my
permission has left the fleet with accusations against me, thy
commander; of what nature I am not even advised. Thou wilt scarcely
deny that thou art one of those who sent forth the ship and shared in
the accusations. Yet I had thought that if I had ever merited thine
ill will, there had been reconciliation between us in the Council
Hall. What has chanced since? Why shouldst thou hate me? Speak
frankly; frankly have I spoken to thee."

"General," replied Antagoras, "there is no hegemony over men's hearts;
thou sayest truly, as man to man, I hate thee. Wherefore? Because
as man to man, thou standest between me and happiness. Because thou
wooest, and canst only woo to dishonour, the virgin in whom I would
seek the sacred wife."

Pausanias slightly recoiled, and the courtesy he had simulated, and
which was essentially foreign to his vehement and haughty character,
fell from him like a mask. For with the words of Antagoras, jealousy
passed within him, and for the moment its agony was such that the
Chian was avenged. But he was too habituated to the stateliness of
self control, to give vent to the rage that seized him. He only said
with a whitened and writhing lip, "Thou art right; all animosities may
yield, save those which a woman's eye can kindle. Thou hatest me--be
it so--that is as man to man. But as officer to chieftain, I bid thee
henceforth beware how thou givest me cause to set this foot on the
head that lifts itself to the height of mine."

With that he rose, turned on his heel, and walked towards the stern,
where he stood apart gazing on the Athenian triremes, which by this
time were in the broad sea. And all the eyes in the fleet were turned
towards that exhibition. For marvellous was the ease and beauty with
which these ships went through their nautical movements; now as in
chase of each other, now approaching as in conflict, veering off,
darting aside, threading as it were a harmonious maze, gliding in
and out, here, there, with the undulous celerity of the serpent. The
admirable build of the ships; the perfect skill of the seamen; the
noiseless docility and instinctive comprehension by which they seemed
to seize and to obey the unforeseen signals of their Admiral--all
struck the lively Greeks that beheld the display, and universal was
the thought if not the murmur, There was the power that should command
the Grecian seas.

Pausanias was too much accustomed to the sway of masses, not to have
acquired that electric knowledge of what circles amongst them from
breast to breast, to which habit gives the quickness of an instinct.
He saw that he had committed an imprudence, and that in seeking to
divert a mutiny, he had incurred a yet greater peril.

He returned to his own ship without exchanging another word with
Antagoras, who had retired to the centre of the vessel, fearing to
trust himself to a premature utterance of that defiance which the last
warning of his chief provoked, and who was therefore arousing the
soldiers to louder shouts of admiration at the Athenian skill.

Rowing back towards the wing occupied by the Peloponnesian allies, of
whose loyalty he was assured, Pausanias then summoned on board their
principal officer, and communicated to him his policy of placing the
Ionians not only apart from the Athenians, but under the vigilance and
control of Peloponnesian vessels in the immediate neighbourhood.

"Therefore," said he, "while the Athenians will occupy this wing, I
wish you to divide yourselves; the Lacedaemonian ships will take the
way the Athenians abandon, but the Corinthian triremes will place
themselves between the ships of the Islands and the Athenians. I shall
give further orders towards distributing the Ionian navy. And thus I
trust either all chance of a mutiny is cut off, or it will be put down
at the first outbreak. Now give orders to your men to take the places
thus assigned to you. And having gratified the vanity of our friends
the Athenians by their holiday evolutions, I shall send to thank and
release them from the fatigue so gracefully borne."

All those with whom he here conferred, and who had no love for Athens
or Ionia, readily fell into the plan suggested. Pausanias then
despatched a Laconian vessel to the Athenian Admiral, with
complimentary messages and orders to cease the manoeuvres, and then
heading the rest of the Laconian contingent, made slow and stately way
towards the station deserted by the Athenians. But pausing once more
before the vessels of the Isles, he despatched orders to their several
commanders, which had the effect of dividing their array, and placing
between them the powerful Corinthian service. In the orders of the
vessels he forwarded for this change, he took especial care to
dislocate the dangerous contiguity of the Samian and Chian triremes.

The sun was declining towards the west when Pausanias had marshalled
the vessels he headed, at their new stations, and the Athenian ships
were already anchored close and secured. But there was an evident
commotion in that part of the fleet to which the Corinthian galleys
had sailed. The Ionians had received with indignant murmurs the
command which divided their strength. Under various pretexts each
vessel delayed to move; and when the Corinthian ships came to take
a vacant space, they found a formidable array,--the soldiers on the
platforms armed to the teeth. The confusion was visible to the Spartan
chief; the loud hubbub almost reached to his ears. He hastened towards
the place; but anxious to continue the gracious part he had so
unwontedly played that day, he cleared his decks of their formidable
hoplites, lest he might seem to meet menace by menace, and drafting
them into other vessels, and accompanied only by his personal
serving-men and rowers, he put forth alone, the gilded shield and the
red banner still displayed at his stern.

But as he was thus conspicuous and solitary, and midway in the space
left between the Laconian and Ionian galleys, suddenly two ships from
the latter darted forth, passed through the centre of the Corinthian
contingent, and steered with the force of all their rowers, right
towards the Spartan's ship.

"Surely," said Pausanias, "that is the Chian's vessel. I recognize the
vine tree and the image of the Bromian god; and surely that other one
is the Chimera under Uliades, the Samian. They come hither, the Ionian
with them, to harangue against obedience to my orders."

"They come hither to assault us," exclaimed Erasinidas; "their beaks
are right upon us."

He had scarcely spoken, when the Chian's brass prow smote the gilded
shield, and rent the red banner from its staff. At the same time, the
Chimera, under Uliades, struck the right side of the Spartan ship, and
with both strokes the stout vessel reeled and dived. "Know, Spartan,"
cried Antagoras, from the platform in the midst of his soldiers, "that
we Ionians hold together. He who would separate, means to conquer,
us. We disown thy hegemony. If ye would seek us, we are with the
Athenians."

With that the two vessels, having performed their insolent and daring
feat, veered and shot off with the same rapidity with which they had
come to the assault; and as they did so, hoisted the Athenian ensign
over their own national standards. The instant that signal was given,
from the other Ionian vessels, which had been evidently awaiting it,
there came a simultaneous shout; and all, vacating their place and
either gliding through or wheeling round the Corinthian galleys,
steered towards the Athenian fleet.

The trireme of Pausanias, meanwhile, sorely damaged, part of its side
rent away, and the water rushing in, swayed and struggled alone in
great peril of sinking.

Instead of pursuing the Ionians, the Corinthian galleys made at once
to the aid of the insulted commander.

"Oh," cried Pausanias, in powerless wrath, "Oh, the accursed element!
Oh that mine enemies had attacked me on the land!"

"How are we to act?" said Aristides.

"We are citizens of a Republic, in which the majority govern,"
answered Cimon. "And the majority here tell us how we are to act. Hark
to the shouts of our men, as they are opening way for their kinsmen of
the Isles."

The sun sank, and with it sank the Spartan maritime ascendancy over
Hellas. And from that hour in which the Samian and the Chian insulted
the galley of Pausanias, if we accord weight to the authority on which
Plutarch must have based his tale, commenced the brief and glorious
sovereignty of Athens. Commence when and how it might, it was an epoch
most signal in the records of the ancient world for its results upon a
civilization to which as yet human foresight can predict no end.


END OF VOLUME I.





PAUSANIAS, THE SPARTAN

VOLUME II.




BOOK IV.




CHAPTER I.

We pass from Byzantium, we are in Sparta. In the Archeion, or office
of the Ephoralty, sate five men, all somewhat advanced in years. These
constituted that stern and terrible authority which had gradually,
and from unknown beginnings,[1] assumed a kind of tyranny over the
descendants of Hercules themselves. They were the representatives of
the Spartan people, elected without reference to rank or wealth,[2]
and possessing jurisdiction not only over the Helots and Laconians,
but over most of the magistrates. They could suspend or terminate any
office, they could accuse the kings and bring them before a court in
which they themselves were judges upon trial of life and death. They
exercised control over the armies and the embassies sent abroad; and
the king, at the head of his forces, was still bound to receive his
instructions from this Council of Five. Their duty, in fact, was to
act as a check upon the kings, and they were the representatives
of that Nobility which embraced the whole Spartan people, in
contradistinction to the Laconians and Helots.

The conference in which they were engaged seemed to rivet their
most earnest attention. And as the presiding Ephor continued the
observations he addressed to them, the rest listened with profound and
almost breathless silence.

The speaker, named Periclides, was older than the others. His frame,
still upright and, sinewy, was yet lean almost to emaciation, his face
sharp, and his dark eyes gleamed with a cunning and sinister light
under his grey brows.

"If," said he, "we are to believe these Ionians, Pausanias meditates
some deadly injury to Greece. As for the complaints of his arrogance,
they are to be received with due caution. Our Spartans, accustomed
to the peculiar discipline of the Laws of Aegimius, rarely suit the
humours of Ionians and innovators. The question to consider is not
whether he has been too imperious towards Ionians who were but the
other day subjected to the Mede, but whether he can make the command
he received from Sparta menacing to Sparta herself. We lend him iron,
he hath holpen himself to gold."

"Besides the booty at Plataea, they say that he has amassed much
plunder at Byzantium," said Zeuxidamus, one of the Ephors, after a
pause.

Periclides looked hard at the speaker, and the two men exchanged a
significant glance.

"For my part," said a third, a man of a severe but noble countenance,
the father of Lysander, and, what was not usual with the Ephors,
belonging to one of the highest families of Sparta, "I have always
held that Sparta should limit its policy to self-defence; that, since
the Persian invasion is over, we have no business with Byzantium. Let
the busy Athenians obtain if they will the empire of the sea. The sea
is no province of ours. All intercourse with foreigners, Asiatics
and Ionians, enervates our men and corrupts our generals. Recall
Pausanias--recall our Spartans. I have said."

"Recall Pausanias first," said Periclides, "and we shall then hear the
truth, and decide what is best to be done."

"If he has medised, if he has conspired against Greece, let us accuse
him to the death," said Agesilaus, Lysander's father.

"We may accuse, but it rests not with us to sentence," said
Periclides, disapprovingly.

"And," said a fourth Ephor, with a visible shudder, "what Spartan dare
counsel sentence of death to the descendant of the Gods?"

"I dare," replied Agesilaus, "but provided only that the descendant of
the Gods had counselled death to Greece. And for that reason, I say
that I would not, without evidence the clearest, even harbour the
thought that a Heracleid could meditate treason to his country."

Periclides felt the reproof and bit his lips.

"Besides," observed Zeuxidamus, "fines enrich the State."

Periclides nodded approvingly.

An expression of lofty contempt passed over the brow and lip of
Agesilaus. But with national self-command, he replied gravely, and
with equal laconic brevity, "If Pausanias hath committed a trivial
error that a fine can expiate, so be it. But talk not of fines till ye
acquit him of all treasonable connivance with the Mede."

At that moment an officer entered on the conclave, and approaching the
presiding Ephor, whispered in his ear.

"This is well," exclaimed Periclides aloud. "A messenger from
Pausanias himself. Your son Lysander has just arrived from Byzantium."

"My son!" exclaimed Agesilaus eagerly, and then checking himself,
added calmly, "That is a sign no danger to Sparta threatened Byzantium
when he left."

"Let him be admitted," said Periclides.

Lysander entered; and pausing at a little distance from the council
board, inclined his head submissively to the Ephors; save a rapid
interchange of glances, no separate greeting took place between son
and father.

"Thou art welcome," said Periclides. "Thou hast done thy duty since
thou hast left the city. Virgins will praise thee as the brave man;
age, more sober, is contented to say thou hast upheld the Spartan
name. And thy father without shame may take thy hand."

A warm flush spread over the young man's face. He stepped forward with
a quick step, his eyes beaming with joy. Calm and stately, his father
rose, clasped the extended hand, then releasing his own placed it an
instant on his son's bended head, and reseated himself in silence.

"Thou camest straight from Pausanias?" said Periclides.

Lysander drew from his vest the despatch entrusted to him, and gave it
to the presiding Ephor. Periclides half rose as if to take with more
respect what had come from the hand of the son of Hercules.

"Withdraw, Lysander," he said, "and wait without while we deliberate
on the contents herein."

Lysander obeyed, and returned to the outer chamber.

Here he was instantly surrounded by eager, though not noisy groups.
Some in that chamber were waiting on business connected with the civil
jurisdiction of the Ephors. Some had gained admittance for the purpose
of greeting their brave countryman, and hearing news of the distant
camp from one who had so lately quitted the great Pausanias. For men
could talk without restraint of their General, though it was but with
reserve and indirectly that they slid in some furtive question as to
the health and safety of a brother or a son.

"My heart warms to be amongst ye again," said the simple Spartan
youth. "As I came thro' the defiles from the sea-coast, and saw on the
height the gleam from the old Temple of Pallas Chalcioecus, I said to
myself, 'Blessed be the Gods that ordained me to live with Spartans or
die with Sparta!'"

"Thou wilt see how much we shall make of thee, Lysander," cried a
Spartan youth a little younger than himself, one of the superior tribe
of the Hylleans. "We have heard of thee at Plataea. It is said that
had Pausanias not been there thou wouldst have been called the bravest
Greek in the armament."

"Hush," said Lysander, "thy few years excuse thee, young friend. Save
our General, we were all equals in the day of battle."

"So thinks not my sister Percalus," whispered the youth archly; "scold
her as thou dost me, if thou dare."

Lysander coloured, and replied in a voice that slightly trembled, "I
cannot hope that thy sister interests herself in me. Nay, when I left
Sparta, I thought--" He checked himself.

"Thought what?"

"That among those who remained behind Percalus might find her
betrothed long before I returned."

"Among those who remained _behind!_ Percalus! How meanly thou must
think of her."

Before Lysander could utter the eager assurance that he was very far
from thinking meanly of Percalus, the other bystanders, impatient
at this whispered colloquy, seized his attention with a volley of
questions, to which he gave but curt and not very relevant answers,
so much had the lad's few sentences disturbed the calm tenor of his
existing self-possession. Nor did he quite regain his presence of mind
until he was once more summoned into the presence of the Ephors.


Notes:

[1] K. O. Miller (Dorians), Book 3, c. 7,  2. According to
Aristotle, Cicero and others, the Ephoralty was founded by Theopompus
subsequently to the mythical time of Lycurgus. To Lycurgus itself it
is referred by Xenophon and Herodotus. Mller considers rightly that,
though an ancient Doric institution, it was incompatible with the
primitive constitution of Lycurgus and had gradually acquired its
peculiar character by causes operating on the Spartan Slato alone.

[2] Aristot. Pol. ii.




CHAPTER II.


The communication of Pausanias had caused an animated discussion in
the Council, and led to a strong division of opinion. But the faces of
the Ephors, rigid and composed, revealed nothing to guide the sagacity
of Lysander, as he re-entered the chamber. He himself, by a strong
effort, had recovered the disturbance into which the words of the boy
had thrown his mind, and he stood before the Ephors intent upon the
object of defending the name, and fulfilling the commands of his
chief. So reverent and grateful was the love that he bore to
Pausanias, that he scarcely permitted himself even to blame the
deviations from Spartan austerity which he secretly mourned in his
mind; and as to the grave guilt of treason to the Hellenic cause, he
had never suffered the suspicion of it to rest upon an intellect
that only failed to be penetrating, where its sight was limited by
discipline and affection. He felt that Pausanias had entrusted to
him his defence, and though he would fain, in his secret heart, have
beheld the Regent once more in Sparta, yet he well knew that it was
the duty of obedience and friendship to plead against the sentence of
recall which was so dreaded by his chief.

With all his thoughts collected towards that end, he stood before the
Ephors, modest in demeanour, vigilant in purpose.

"Lysander," said Periclides, after a short pause, "we know thy
affection to the Regent, thy chosen friend; but we know also thy
affection for thy native Sparta; where the two may come into conflict,
it is, and it must be, thy country which will claim the preference. We
charge thee, by virtue of our high powers and authority, to speak
the truth on the questions we shall address to thee, without fear or
favour."

Lysander bowed his head. "I am in presence of Sparta my mother and
Agesilaus my father. They know that I was not reared to lie to
either."

"Thou say'st well. Now answer. Is it true that Pausanias wears the
robes of the Mede?"

"It is true."

"And has he stated to thee his reasons?

"Not only to me, but to others."

"What are they?"

"That in the mixed and half medised population of Byzantium, splendour
of attire has become so associated with the notion of sovereign
power, that the Eastern dress and attributes of pomp are essential to
authority; and that men bow before his tiara, who might rebel against
the helm and the horsehair. Outward signs have a value, O Ephors,
according to the notions men are brought up to attach to them."

"Good," said one of the Ephors. "There is in this departure from our
habits, be it right or wrong, no sign then of connivance with the
Barbarian."

"Connivance is a thing secret and concealed, and shuns all outward
signs."

"But," said Periclides, "what say the other Spartan Captains to this
vain fashion, which savours not of the Laws of Aegimius?"

"The first law of Aegimius commands us to fight and to die for the
king or the chief who has kingly sway. The Ephors may blame, but the
soldier must not question."

"Thou speakest boldly for so young a man," said Periclides harshly.

"I was commanded to speak the truth."

"Has Pausanias entrusted the command of Byzantium to Gongylus the
Eretrian, who already holds four provinces under Xerxes?"

"He has done so."

"Know you the reason for that selection?"

"Pausanias says that the Eretrian could not more show his faith to
Hellas, than by resigning Eastern satrapies so vast."

"Has he resigned them?"

"I know not; but I presume that when the Persian king knows that the
Eretrian is leagued against him with the other Captains of Hellas, he
will assign the Satrapies to another."

"And is it true that the Persian prisoners, Ariamanes and Datis, have
escaped from the custody of Gongylus?"

"It is true. The charge against Gongylus for that error was heard in a
council of confederate captains, and no proof against him was brought
forward. Cimon was entrusted with the pursuit of the prisoners.
Pausanias himself sent forth fifty scouts on Thessalian horses. The
prisoners were not discovered."

"Is it true," said Zeuxidamus, "that Pausanias has amassed much
plunder at Byzantium?"

"What he has won as a conqueror was assigned to him by common voice,
but he has spent largely out of his own resources in securing the
Greek sway at Byzantium."

There was a silence. None liked to question the young soldier farther;
none liked to put the direct question, whether or not the Ionian
Ambassador could have cause for suspecting the descendant of Hercules
of harm against the Greeks. At length Agesilaus said:

"I demand the word, and I claim the right to speak plainly. My son is
young, but he is of the blood of Hyllus.

"Son--Pausanias is dear to thee. Man soon dies: man's name lives for
ever. Dear to thee if Pausanias is, dearer must be his name. In
brief, the Ionian Ambassadors complain of his arrogance towards the
Confederates; they demand his recall. Cimon has addressed a private
letter to the Spartan host, with whom he lodged here, intimating that
it may be best for the honour of Pausanias, and for our weight with
the allies, to hearken to the Ionian Embassy. It is a grave question,
therefore, whether we should recall the Regent or refuse to hear these
charges. Thou art fresh from Byzantium; thou must know more of this
matter than we. Loose thy tongue, put aside equivocation. Say thy
mind, it is for us to decide afterwards what is our duty to the
State."

"I thank thee, my father," said Lysander, colouring deeply at a
compliment paid rarely to one so young, "and thus I answer thee:

"Pausanias, in seeking to enforce discipline and preserve the Spartan
supremacy, was at first somewhat harsh and severe to these Ionians,
who had indeed but lately emancipated themselves from the Persian
yoke, and who were little accustomed to steady rule. But of late he
has been affable and courteous, and no complaint was urged against him
for austerity at the time when this embassy was sent to you. Wherefore
was it then sent? Partly, it maybe, from motives of private hate, not
public zeal, out partly because the Ionian race sees with reluctance
and jealousy the Hegemony of Sparta. I would speak plainly. It is not
for me to say whether ye will or not that Sparta should retain the
maritime supremacy of Hellas, but if ye do will it, ye will not recall
Pausanias. No other than the Conqueror of Plataea has a chance of
maintaining that authority. Eager would the Ionians be upon any
pretext, false or frivolous, to rid themselves of Pausanias. Artfully
willing would be the Athenians in especial that ye listened to such
pretexts; for, Pausanias gone, Athens remains and rules. On what
belongs to the policy of the State it becomes not me to proffer a
word, O Ephors. In what I have said I speak what the whole armament
thinks and murmurs. But this I may say as soldier to whom the honour
of his chief is dear.--The recall of Pausanias may or may not be wise
as a public act, but it will be regarded throughout all Hellas as a
personal affront to your general; it will lower the royalty of Sparta,
it will be an insult to the blood of Hercules. Forgive me, O venerable
magistrates. I have fought by the side of Pausanias, and I cannot dare
to think that the great Conqueror of Plataea, the man who saved Hellas
from the Mede, the man who raised Sparta on that day to a renown which
penetrated the farthest corners of the East, will receive from you
other return than fame and glory. And fame and glory will surely make
that proud spirit doubly Spartan."

Lysander paused, breathing hard and colouring deeply--annoyed with
himself for a speech of which both the length and the audacity were
much more Ionian than Spartan.

The Ephors looked at each other, and there was again silence.

"Son of Agesilaus," said Periclides, "thou hast proved thy
Lacedaemonian virtues too well, and too high and general is thy repute
amongst our army, as it is borne to our ears, for us to doubt thy
purity and patriotism; otherwise, we might fear that whilst thou
speakest in some contempt of Ionian wolves, thou hadst learned the
arts of Ionian Agoras. But enough: thou art dismissed. Go to thy home;
glad the eyes of thy mother; enjoy the honours thou wilt find awaiting
thee amongst thy coevals. Thou wilt learn later whether thou return to
Byzantium, or whether a better field for thy valour may not be found
in the nearer war with which Arcadia threatens us."

As soon as Lysander left the chamber,

Agesilaus spoke:--

"Ye will pardon me, Ephors, if I bade my son speak thus boldly. I need
not say I am no vain, foolish father, desiring to raise the youth
above his years. But making allowance for his partiality to the
Regent, ye will grant that he is a fair specimen of our young
soldiery. Probably, as he speaks, so will our young men think. To
recall Pausanias is to disgrace our general. Ye have my mind. If the
Regent be guilty of the darker charges insinuated--correspondence with
the Persian against Greece--I know but one sentence for him--Death.
And it is because I would have ye consider well how dread is such a
charge, and how awful such a sentence, that I entreat ye not lightly
to entertain the one unless ye are prepared to meditate the other. As
for the maritime supremacy of Sparta, I hold, as I have held before,
that it is not within our councils to strive for it; it must pass from
us. We may surrender it later with dignity; if we recall our general
on such complaints, we lose it with humiliation."

"I agree with Agesilaus," said another, "Pausanias is an Heracleid; my
vote shall not insult him."

"I agree too with Agesilaus," said a third Ephor; "not because
Pausanias is the Heracleid, but because he is the victorious general
who demands gratitude and respect from every true Spartan."

"Be it so," said Periclides, who, seeing himself thus outvoted in the
council, covered his disappointment with the self-control habitual to
his race. "But be we in no hurry to give these Ionian legates their
answer to-day. We must deliberate well how to send such a reply as may
be most conciliating and prudent. And for the next few days we have
an excuse for delay in the religious ceremonials due to the venerable
Divinity of Fear, which commence to-morrow. Pass we to the other
business before us; there are many whom we have kept waiting.
Agesilaus, thou art excused from the public table to-day if thou
wouldst sup with thy brave son at home."

"Nay," said Agesilaus, "my son will go to his pheidition and I to
mine--as I did on the day when I lost my first-born."




CHAPTER III.


On quitting the Hall of the Ephors, Lysander found himself at once on
the Spartan Agora, wherein that Hall was placed. This was situated on
the highest of the five hills, over which the unwalled city spread its
scattered population, and was popularly called the Tower. Before the
eyes of the young Spartan rose the statues, rude and antique, of
Latona, the Pythian Apollo, and his sister Artemis;--venerable images
to Lysander's early associations. The place which they consecrated was
called Chorus; for there, in honour of Apollo, and in the most pompous
of all the Spartan festivals, the young men were accustomed to lead
the sacred dance. The Temple of Apollo himself stood a little in the
background, and near to it that of Hera But more vast than any image
of a god was a colossal statue which represented the Spartan people;
while on a still loftier pinnacle of the hill than that table-land
which enclosed the Agora--dominating, as it were, the whole
city--soared into the bright blue sky the sacred Chalcioecus, or
Temple of the Brazen Pallas, darkening with its shadow another fane
towards the left dedicated to the Lacedaemonian Muses, and receiving a
gleam on the right from the brazen statue of Zeus, which was said by
tradition to have been made by a disciple of Daedalus himself.

But short time had Lysander to note undisturbed the old familiar
scenes. A crowd of his early friends had already collected round the
doors of the Archeion, and rushed forward to greet and welcome him.
The Spartan coldness and austerity of social intercourse vanished
always before the enthusiasm created by the return to his native city
of a man renowned for valour; and Lysander's fame had come back to
Sparta before himself. Joyously, and in triumph, the young men bore
away their comrade. As they passed through the centre of the Agora,
where assembled the various merchants and farmers, who, under the name
of Perioeci, carried on the main business of the Laconian mart, and
were often much wealthier than the Spartan citizens, trade ceased its
hubbub; all drew near to gaze on the young warrior; and now, as they
turned from the Agora, a group of eager women met them on the road,
and shrill voices exclaimed: "Go, Lysander, thou hast fought well--go
and choose for thyself the maiden that seems to thee the fairest. Go,
marry and get sons for Sparta."

Lysander's step seemed to tread on air, and tears of rapture stood in
his downcast eyes. But suddenly all the voices hushed; the crowds
drew back; his friends halted. Close by the great Temple of Fear, and
coming from some place within its sanctuary, there approached towards
the Spartan and his comrades a majestic woman--a woman of so grand a
step and port, that, though her veil as yet hid her face, her form
alone sufficed to inspire awe. All knew her by her gait; all made way
for Alithea, the widow of a king, the mother of Pausanias the Regent.
Lysander, lifting his eyes from the ground, impressed by the hush
around him, recognised the form as it advanced slowly towards him,
and, leaving his comrades behind, stepped forward to salute the mother
of his chief. She, thus seeing him, turned slightly aside, and paused
by a rude building of immemorial antiquity which stood near the
temple. That building was the tomb of the mythical Orestes, whose
bones were said to have been interred there by the command of the
Delphian Oracle. On a stone at the foot of the tomb sate calmly down
the veiled woman, and waited the approach of Lysander. When he came
near, and alone--all the rest remaining aloof and silent--Alithea
removed her veil, and a countenance grand and terrible as that of a
Fate lifted its rigid looks to the young Spartan's eyes. Despite
her age--for she had passed into middle life before she had borne
Pausanias--Alithea retained all the traces of a marvellous and almost
preterhuman beauty. But it was not the beauty of woman. No softness
sate on those lips: no love beamed from those eyes. Stern,
inexorable--not a fault in her grand proportions--the stoutest heart
might have felt a throb of terror as the eye rested upon that pitiless
and imposing front. And the deep voice of the Spartan warrior had a
slight tremor in its tone as it uttered its respectful salutation.

"Draw near, Lysander. What sayest thou of my son?"

"I left him well, and--"

"Does a Spartan mother first ask of the bodily health of an absent
man-child? By the tomb of Orestes and near the Temple of Fear, a
king's widow asks a Spartan soldier what he says of a Spartan chief."

"All Hellas," replied Lysander, recovering his spirit, "might answer
thee best, Alithea. For all Hellas proclaimed that the bravest man at
Plataea was thy son, my chief."

"And where did my son, thy chief, learn to boast of bravery? They tell
me he inscribed the offerings to the gods with his name as the victor
of Plataea--the battle won not by one man but assembled Greece. The
inscription that dishonours him by its vainglory will be erased. To be
brave is nought. Barbarians may be brave. But to dedicate bravery to
his native land becomes a Spartan. He who is everything against a foe
should count himself as nothing in the service of his country."

Lysander remained silent under the gaze of those fixed and imperious
eyes.

"Youth," said Alithea, after a short pause, "if thou returnest to
Byzantium, say this from Alithea to thy chief:--'From thy childhood,
Pausanias, has thy mother feared for thee; and at the Temple of Fear
did she sacrifice when she heard that thou wert victorious at Plataea;
for in thy heart are the seeds of arrogance and pride; and victory to
thine arms may end in ruin to thy name. And ever since that day does
Alithea haunt the precincts of that temple. Come back and be Spartan,
as thine ancestors were before thee, and Alithea will rejoice and
think the Gods have heard her. But if thou seest within thyself one
cause why thy mother should sacrifice to Fear, lest her son should
break the laws of Sparta, or sully his Spartan name, humble thyself,
and mourn that thou didst not perish at Plataea. By a temple and from
a tomb I send thee warning.' Say this. I have done; join thy friends."

Again the veil fell over the face, and the figure of the woman
remained seated at the tomb long after the procession had passed on,
and the mirth of young voices was again released.




CHAPTER IV.


The group that attended Lysander continued to swell as he mounted the
acclivity on which his parental home was placed. The houses of the
Spartan proprietors were at that day not closely packed together as in
the dense population of commercial towns. More like the villas of a
suburb, they lay a little apart, on the unequal surface of the rugged
ground, perfectly plain and unadorned, covering a large space with
ample court-yards, closed in, in front of the narrow streets. And
still was in force the primitive law which ordained that doorways
should be shaped only by the saw, and the ceilings by the axe; but in
contrast to the rudeness of the private houses, at every opening in
the street were seen the Doric pillars or graceful stairs of a temple;
and high over all dominated the Tower-hill, or Acropolis, with the
antique fane of Pallas Chalcioecus.

And so, loud and joyous, the procession bore the young warrior to the
threshold of his home. It was an act of public honour to his fair
repute and his proven valour. And the Spartan felt as proud of that
unceremonious attendance as ever did Roman chief sweeping under arches
of triumph in the curule car.

At the threshold of the door stood his mother--for the tidings of his
coming had preceded him--and his little brothers and sisters. His step
quickened at the sight of these beloved faces.

"Bound forward, Lysander," said one of the train; "thou hast won the
right to thy mother's kiss."

"But fail us not at the pheidition before sunset," cried another.
"Every one of the obe will send his best contribution to the feast to
welcome thee back. We shall have a rare banquet of it."

And so, as his mother drew him within the doors, his arm round her
waist, and the children clung to his cloak, to his knees, or sprung up
to claim his kiss, the procession set up a kind of chaunted shout, and
left the warrior in his home.

"Oh, this is joy, joy!" said Lysander, with sweet tears in his eyes,
as he sat in the women's apartment, his mother by his side, and the
little ones round him. "Where, save in Sparta, does a man love a
home?"

And this exclamation, which might have astonished an Ionian--seeing
how much the Spartan civilians merged the individual in the state--was
yet true, where the Spartan was wholly Spartan, where, by habit and
association, he had learned to love the severities of the existence
that surrounded him, and where the routine of duties which took him
from his home, whether for exercises or the public tables, made yet
more precious the hours of rest and intimate intercourse with his
family. For the gay pleasures and lewd resorts of other Greek cities
were not known to the Spartan. Not for him were the cook-shops and
baths and revels of Ionian idlers. When the State ceased to claim him,
he had nothing but his Home.

As Lysander thus exclaimed, the door of the room had opened
noiselessly, and Agesilaus stood unperceived at the entrance, and
overheard his son. His face brightened singularly at Lysander's words.
He came forward and opened his arms.

"Embrace me now, my boy! my brave boy! embrace me now! The Ephors are
not here."

Lysander turned, sprang up, and was in his father's arms.

"So thou art not changed. Byzantium has not spoiled thee. Thy name
is uttered with praise unmixed with fear. All Persia's gold, all the
great king's Satrapies could not medize my Lysander. Ah," continued
the father, turning to his wife, "who could have predicted the
happiness of this hour? Poor child! he was born sickly. Hera had
already given us more sons than we could provide for, ere our lands
were increased by the death of thy childless relatives. Wife, wife!
when the family council ordained him to be exposed on Tagetus, when
thou didst hide thyself lest thy tears should be seen, and my voice
trembled as I said 'Be the laws obeyed,' who could have guessed that
the gods would yet preserve him to be the pride of our house? Blessed
be Zeus the saviour and Hercules the warrior!"

"And," said the mother, "blessed be Pausanias, the descendant of
Hercules, who took the forlorn infant to his father's home, and who
has reared him now to be the example of Spartan youths."

"Ah," said Lysander, looking up into his father's eyes, "if I can ever
be worthy of your love, O my father, forget not, I pray thee, that it
is to Pausanias I owe life, home, and a Spartan's glorious destiny."

"I forget it not," answered Agesilaus, with a mournful and serious
expression of countenance. "And on this I would speak to thee. Thy
mother must spare thee awhile to me. Come. I lean on thy shoulder
instead of my staff."

Agesilaus led his son into the large hall, which was the main chamber
of the house; and pacing up and down the wide and solitary floor,
questioned him closely as to the truth of the stories respecting the
Regent which had reached the Ephors.

"Thou must speak with naked heart to me," said Agesilaus; "for I tell
thee that, if I am Spartan, I am also man and father; and I would
serve him, who saved thy life and taught thee how to fight for thy
country, in every way that may be lawful to a Spartan and a Greek."

Thus addressed, and convinced of his father's sincerity, Lysander
replied with ingenuous and brief simplicity. He granted that Pausanias
had exposed himself with a haughty imprudence, which it was difficult
to account for, to the charges of the Ionians. "But," he added, with
that shrewd observation which his affection for Pausanias rather than
his experience of human nature had taught him--"But we must remember
that in Pausanias we are dealing with no ordinary man. If he has
faults of judgment, which a Spartan rarely commits, he has, O my
father, a force of intellect and passion, which a Spartan as rarely
knows. Shall I tell you the truth? Our State is too small for him.
But would it not have been too small for Hercules? Would the laws of
Aegimius have permitted Hercules to perform his labours and achieve
his conquests? This vast and fiery nature suddenly released from the
cramps of our customs, which Pausanias never in his youth regarded
save as galling, expands itself, as an eagle long caged would
outspread its wings."

"I comprehend," said Agesilaus thoughtfully, and somewhat sadly.
"There have been moments in my own life when I regarded Sparta as a
prison. In my early manhood I was sent on a mission to Corinth. Its
pleasures, its wild tumult of gay licence dazzled and inebriated me.
I said, 'This it is to live.' I came back to Sparta sullen and
discontented. But then, happily, I saw thy mother at the festival of
Diana--we loved each other, we married--and when I was permitted to
take her to my home, I became sobered and was a Spartan again. I
comprehend. Poor Pausanias! But luxury and pleasure, though they charm
awhile, do not fill up the whole of a soul like that of our Heracleid.
From these he may recover; but Ambition--that is the true liver of
Tantalus, and grows larger under the beak that feeds on it. What is
his ambition, if Sparta be too small for him?

"I think his ambition would be to make Sparta as big as himself."

Agesilaus stroked his chin musingly.

"And how?"

"I cannot tell, I can only guess. But the Persian war, if I may judge
by what I hear and see, cannot roll away and leave the boundaries
of each Greek State the same. Two States now stand forth prominent,
Athens and Sparta. Themistocles and Cimon aim at making Athens the
head of Hellas, Perhaps Pausanias aims to effect for Sparta what they
would effect for Athens."

"And what thinkest thou of such a scheme?"

"Ask me not. I am too young, too inexperienced, and perhaps too
Spartan to answer rightly."

"Too Spartan, because thou art too covetous of power for Sparta."

"Too Spartan, because I may be too anxious to keep Sparta what she
is."

Agesilaus smiled. "We are of the same mind, my son. Think not that the
rocky defiles which enclose us shut out from our minds all the ideas
that new circumstance strikes from Time. I have meditated on what thou
sayest Pausanias may scheme. It is true that the invasion of the Mede
must tend to raise up one State in Greece to which the others will
look for a head. I have asked myself, can Sparta be that State? and my
reason tells me, No. Sparta is lost if she attempt it. She may become
something else, but she cannot be Sparta. Such a State must become
maritime, and depend on fleets. Our inland situation forbids this.
True we have ports in which the Perioeci flourish; but did we use them
for a permanent policy the Perioeci must become our masters. These
five villages would be abandoned for a mart on the sea-shore. This
mother of men would be no more. A State that so aspires must have
ample wealth at its command. We have none. We might raise tribute from
other Greek cities, but for that purpose we must have fleets again,
to overawe and compel, for no tribute will be long voluntary. A state
that would be the active governor of Hellas must have lives to spare
in abundance. We have none, unless we always do hereafter as we did
at Plataea, raise an army of Helots--seven Helots to one Spartan. How
long, if we did so, would the Helots obey us, and meanwhile how would
our lands be cultivated? A State that would be the centre of Greece,
must cultivate all that can charm and allure strangers. We banish
strangers, and what charms and allures them would womanize us. More
than all, a State that would obtain the sympathies of the turbulent
Hellenic populations, must have the most popular institutions. It
must be governed by a Demus, We are an Oligarchic Aristocracy--a
disciplined camp of warriors, not a licentious Agora. Therefore,
Sparta cannot assume the head of a Greek Confederacy except in the
rare seasons of actual war; and the attempt to make her the head of
such a confederacy would cause changes so repugnant to our manners and
habits, that it would be fraught with destruction to him who made the
attempt, or to us if he succeeded. Wherefore, to sum up, the ambition
of Pausanias is in this impracticable, and must be opposed."

"And Athens," cried Lysander, with a slight pang of natural and
national jealousy, "Athens then must wrest from Pausanias the hegemony
he now holds for Sparta, and Athens must be what the Athenian ambition
covets."

"We cannot help it--she must; but can it last?--Impossible. And woe to
her if she ever comes in contact with the bronze of Laconian shields.
But in the meanwhile, what is to be done with this great and awful
Heracleid? They accuse him of medising, of secret conspiracy with
Persia itself. Can that be possible?

"If so, it is but to use Persia on behalf of Sparta. If he would
subdue Greece, it is not for the king, it is for the race of
Hercules."

"Ay, ay, ay," cried Agesilaus, shading his face with his hand. "All
becomes clear to me now. Listen. Did I openly defend Pausanias before
the Ephors, I should injure his cause. But when they talk of his
betraying Hellas and Sparta, I place before them nakedly and broadly
their duty if that charge be true. For if true, O my son, Pausanias
must die as criminals die."

"Die--criminal--an Heracleid--king's blood--the victor of Plataea--my
friend Pausanias!"

"Rather he than Sparta. What sayest thou?"

"Neither, neither," exclaimed Lysander, wringing his
hands--"impossible both."

"Impossible both, be it so. I place before the Ephors the terrors of
accrediting that charge, in order that they may repudiate it. For the
lesser ones it matters not; he is in no danger there, save that of
fine. And his gold," added Agesilaus with a curved lip of disdain,
"will both condemn and save him. For the rest, I would spare him the
dishonour of being publicly recalled, and to say truth, I would save
Sparta the peril she might incur from his wrath, if she inflicted on
him that slight. But mark me, he himself must resign his command,
voluntarily, and return to Sparta. Better so for him and his pride,
for he cannot keep the hegemony against the will of the Ionians,
whose fleet is so much larger than ours, and it is to his gain if his
successor lose it, not he. But better, not only for his pride, but
for his glory and his name, that he should come from these scenes of
fierce temptation, and, since birth made him a Spartan, learn here
again to conform to what he cannot change. I have spoken thus plainly
to thee. Use the words I have uttered as thou best may, after thy
return to Pausanias, which I will strive to make speedy. But while
we talk there goes on danger--danger still of his abrupt recall--for
there are those who will seize every excuse for it. Enough of these
grave matters: the sun is sinking towards the west, and thy companions
await thee at thy feast; mine will be eager to greet me on thy return,
and thy little brothers, who go with me to my pheidition, will hear
thee so praised that they will long for the crypteia--long to be men,
and find some future Plataea for themselves. May the gods forbid it!
War is a terrible unsettler. Time saps States as a tide the cliff. War
is an inundation, and when it ebbs, a landmark has vanished."





CHAPTER V.


Nothing so largely contributed to the peculiar character of Spartan
society as the uniform custom of taking the principal meal at a public
table. It conduced to four objects: the precise status of aristocracy,
since each table was formed according to title and rank,--equality
among aristocrats, since each at the same table was held the equal of
the other--military union, for as they feasted so they fought, being
formed into divisions in the field according as they messed together
at home; and lastly, that sort of fellowship in public opinion
which intimate association amongst those of the same rank and habit
naturally occasions. These tables in Sparta were supplied by private
contributions; each head of a family was obliged to send a certain
portion at his own cost, and according to the number of his children.
If his fortune did not allow him to do this, he was excluded from the
public tables. Hence a certain fortune was indispensable to the pure
Spartan, and this was one reason why it was permitted to expose
infants, if the family threatened to be too large for the father's
means. The general arrangements were divided into syssitia, according,
perhaps, to the number of families, and correspondent to the divisions
or obes acknowledged by the State. But these larger sections were
again subdivided into companies or clubs of fifteen, vacancies being
filled up by ballot; but one vote could exclude. And since, as we have
said, the companies were marshalled in the field according to their
association at the table, it is clear that fathers of grave years and
of high station (station in Sparta increased with years) could not
have belonged to the same table as the young men, their sons. Their
boys under a certain age they took to their own pheiditia, where the
children sat upon a lower bench, and partook of the simplest dishes
of the fare. Though the cheer at these public tables was habitually
plain, yet upon occasion it was enriched by presents to the
after-course, of game and fruit.

Lysander was received by his old comrade with that cordiality in which
was mingled for the first time a certain manly respect, due to feats
in battle, and so flattering to the young.

The prayer to the Gods, correspondent to the modern grace, and the
pious libations being concluded, the attendant Helots served the black
broth, and the party fell to, with the appetite produced by hardy
exercise and mountain air.

"What do the allies say to the black broth?" asked a young Spartan.

"They do not comprehend its merits," answered Lysander.




CHAPTER VI.


Everything in the familiar life to which he had returned delighted the
young Lysander. But for anxious thoughts about Pausanias, he would
have been supremely blest. To him the various scenes of his early
years brought no associations of the restraint and harshness which
revolted the more luxurious nature and the fiercer genius of
Pausanias. The plunge into the frigid waters of Eurotas--the sole bath
permitted to the Spartans[1] at a time when the rest of Greece had
already carried the art of bathing into voluptuous refinement--the
sight of the vehement contests of the boys, drawn up as in battle, at
the game of football, or in detached engagements, sparing each other
so little, that the popular belief out of Sparta was that they were
permitted to tear out each other's eyes,[2] but subjecting strength to
every skilful art that gymnastics could teach--the mimic war on the
island, near the antique trees of the Plane Garden, waged with weapons
of wood and blunted iron, and the march regulated to the music of
flutes and lyres--nay, even the sight of the stern altar, at which
boys had learned to bear the anguish of stripes without a murmur--all
produced in this primitive and intensely national intelligence an
increased admiration for the ancestral laws, which, carrying patience,
fortitude, address and strength to the utmost perfection, had formed a
handful of men into the calm lords of a fierce population, and placed
the fenceless villages of Sparta beyond a fear of the external
assaults and the civil revolutions which perpetually stormed the
citadels and agitated the market-places of Hellenic cities. His was
not the mind to perceive that much was relinquished for the sake of
that which was gained, or to comprehend that there was more which
consecrates humanity in one stormy day of Athens, than in a serene
century of iron Lacedaemon. But there is ever beauty of soul where
there is enthusiastic love of country; and the young Spartan was wise
in his own Dorian way.

The religious festival which had provided the Ephors with an excuse
for delaying their answer to the Ionian envoys occupied the city.
The youths and the maidens met in the sacred chorus; and Lysander,
standing by amidst the gazers, suddenly felt his heart beat. A boy
pulled him by the skirt of his mantle.

"Lysander, hast thou yet scolded Percalus?" said the boy's voice,
archly.

"My young friend," answered Lysander, colouring high, "Percalus hath
vouchsafed me as yet no occasion; and, indeed, she alone, of all the
friends whom I left behind, does not seem to recognize me."

His eyes, as he spoke, rested with a mute reproach in their gaze on
the form of a virgin, who had just paused in the choral dance, and
whose looks were bent obdurately on the ground. Her luxuriant hair was
drawn upward from cheek and brow, braided into a knot at the crown of
the head, in the fashion so trying to those who have neither bloom
nor beauty, so exquisitely becoming to those who have both; and the
maiden, even amid Spartan girls, was pre-eminently lovely. It is true
that the sun had somewhat embrowned the smooth cheek; but the stately
throat and the rounded arms were admirably fair--not, indeed, with the
pale and dead whiteness which the Ionian women sought to obtain by
art, but with the delicate rose-hue of Hebe's youth. Her garment
of snow-white wool, fastened over both shoulders with large golden
clasps, was without sleeves, fitting not too tightly to the harmonious
form, and leaving more than the ancle free to the easy glide of the
dance. Taller than Hellenic women usually were, but about the average
height of her Spartan companions, her shape was that which the
sculptors give to Artemis. Light and feminine and virginlike, but with
all the rich vitality of a divine youth, with a force, not indeed of a
man, but such as art would give to the goddess whose step bounds over
the mountain top, and whose arm can launch the shaft from the silver
bow--yet was there something in the mien and face of Percalus more
subdued and bashful than in those of most of the girls around her;
and, as if her ear had caught Lysander's words, a smile just now
played round her lips, and gave to all the countenance a wonderful
sweetness. Then, as it became her turn once more to join in the
circling measure she lifted her eyes, directed them full upon the
young Spartan, and the eyes said plainly, "Ungrateful! I forget thee!
I!"

It was but one glance, and she seemed again wholly intent upon the
dance; but Lysander felt as if he had tasted the nectar, and caught
a glimpse of the courts of the Gods. No further approach was made by
either, although intervals in the evening permitted it. But if on the
one hand there was in Sparta an intercourse between the youth of
both sexes wholly unknown in most of the Grecian States, and if that
intercourse made marriages of love especially more common there than
elsewhere, yet, when love did actually exist, and was acknowledged
by some young pair, they shunned public notice; the passion became
a secret, or confidants to it were few. Then came the charm of
stealth:--to woo and to win, as if the treasure were to be robbed by a
lover from the Heaven unknown to man. Accordingly Lysander now mixed
with the spectators, conversed cheerfully, only at distant intervals
permitted his eyes to turn to Percalus, and when her part in the
chorus had concluded, a sign, undetected by others, seemed to have
been exchanged between them, and, a little while after, Lysander had
disappeared from the assembly.

He wandered down the street called the Aphetais, and after a little
while the way became perfectly still and lonely, for the inhabitants
had crowded to the sacred festival, and the houses lay quiet and
scattered. So he went on, passing the ancient temple in which Ulysses
is said to have dedicated a statue in honour of his victory in the
race over the suitors of Penelope, and paused where the ground lay
bare and rugged around many a monument to the fabled chiefs of the
heroic age. Upon a crag that jutted over a silent hollow, covered with
oleander and arbute and here and there the wild rose, the young lover
sat down, waiting patiently; for the eyes of Percalus had told him he
should not wait in vain. Afar he saw, in the exceeding clearness of
the atmosphere, the Taenarium or Temple of Neptune, unprophetic of the
dark connexion that shrine would hereafter have with him whom he then
honoured as a chief worthy, after death, of a monument amidst those
heroes: and the gale that cooled his forehead wandered to him from the
field of the Hellanium in which the envoys of Greece had taken council
how to oppose the march of Xerxes, when his myriads first poured into
Europe.

Alas, all the great passions that distinguish race from race pass away
in the tide of generations. The enthusiasm of soul which gives us
heroes and demi-gods for ancestors, and hallows their empty tombs; the
vigour of thoughtful freedom which guards the soil from invasion, and
shivers force upon the edge of intelligence; the heroic age and the
civilized alike depart; and he who wanders through the glens of
Laconia can scarcely guess where was the monument of Lelex, or the
field of the Hellanium. And yet on the same spot where sat the young
Spartan warrior, waiting for the steps of the beloved one, may, at
this very hour, some rustic lover be seated, with a heart beating with
like emotions, and an ear listening for as light a tread. Love alone
never passes away from the spot where its footstep hath once pressed
the earth, and reclaimed the savage. Traditions, freedom, the thirst
for glory, art, laws, creeds, vanish; but the eye thrills the breast,
and hand warms to hand, as before the name of Lycurgus was heard, or
Helen was borne a bride to the home of Menelaus. Under the influence
of this power, then, something of youth is still retained by nations
the most worn with time. But the power thus eternal in nations is
shortlived for the individual being. Brief, indeed, in the life of
each is that season which lasts for ever in the life of all. From the
old age of nations glory fades away; but in their utmost decrepitude
there is still a generation young enough to love. To the individual
man, however, glory alone remains when the snows of ages have fallen,
and love is but the memory of a boyish dream. No wonder that the Greek
genius, half incredulous of the soul, clung with such tenacity to
Youth. What a sigh from the heart of the old sensuous world breathes
in the strain of Mimnermus, bewailing with so fierce and so deep a
sorrow the advent of the years in which man is loved no more!

Lysander's eye was still along the solitary road, when he heard a low
musical laugh behind him. He started in surprise, and beheld Percalus.
Her mirth was increased by his astonished gaze, till, in revenge,
he caught both her hands, and drawing her towards him, kissed, not
without a struggle, the lips into serious gravity.

Extricating herself from him, the maiden put on an air of offended
dignity, and Lysander, abashed at his own audacity, muttered some
broken words of penitence.

"But indeed," he added, as he saw the cloud vanishing from her brow;
"indeed thou wert so provoking, and so irresistibly beauteous. And how
camest thou here, as if thou hadst dropped from the heavens?"

"Didst thou think," answered Percalus demurely, "that I could be
suspected of following thee? Nay; I tarried till I could accompany
Euryclea to her home yonder, and then slipping from her by her door,
I came across the grass and the glen to search for the arrow shot
yesterday in the hollow below thee." So saying, she tripped from the
crag by his side into the nooked recess below, which was all out
of sight, in case some passenger should pass the road, and where,
stooping down, she seemed to busy herself in searching for the shaft
amidst the odorous shrubs.

Lysander was not slow in following her footstep.

"Thine arrow is here," said he, placing his hand to his heart.

"Fie! The Ionian poets teach thee these compliments."

"Not so. Who hath sung more of Love and his arrows than our own
Alcman?"

"Mean you the Regent's favourite brother?"

"Oh no! The ancient Alcman; the poet whom even the Ephors sanction."

Percalus ceased to seek for the arrow, and they seated themselves on a
little knoll in the hollow, side by side, and frankly she gave him her
hand, and listened, with rosy cheek and rising bosom, to his honest
wooing. He told her truly, how her image had been with him in the
strange lands; how faithful he had been to the absent, amidst all the
beauties of the Isles and of the East. He reminded her of their early
days--how, even as children, each had sought the other. He spoke
of his doubts, his fears, lest he should find himself forgotten or
replaced; and how overjoyed he had been when at last her eye replied
to his.

"And we understood each other so well, did we not, Percalus? Here we
have so often met before; here we parted last; here thou knewest I
should go; here I knew that I might await thee."

Percalus did not answer at much length, but what she said sufficed to
enchant her lover. For the education of a Spartan maid did not favour
the affected concealment of real feelings. It could not, indeed,
banish what Nature prescribes to women---the modest self esteem--the
difficulty to utter by word, what eye and blush reveal--nor, perhaps,
something of that arch and innocent malice, which enjoys to taste
the power which beauty exercises before the warm heart will freely
acknowledge the power which sways itself. But the girl, though a
little wilful and high-spirited, was a candid, pure, and noble
creature, and too proud of being loved by Lysander to feel more than a
maiden's shame to confess her own.

"And when I return," said the Spartan, "ah then look out and take
care; for I shall speak to thy father, gain his consent to our
betrothal, and then carry thee away, despite all thy struggles, to the
bridesmaid, and these long locks, alas, will fall."

"I thank thee for thy warning, and will find my arrow in time to guard
myself," said Percalus, turning away her face, but holding up her hand
in pretty menace; "but where is the arrow? I must make haste and find
it."

"Thou wilt have time enough, courteous Amazon, in mine absence, for I
must soon return to Byzantium."

_Percalus._ "Art thou so sure of that?"

_Lysander._ "Why--dost thou doubt it?"

_Percalus._ (rising and moving the arbute boughs aside with the tip of
her sandal), "And, unless thou wouldst wait very long for my father's
consent, perchance thou mayst have to ask for it very soon--too soon
to prepare thy courage for so great a peril."

_Lysander_ (perplexed). "What canst thou mean? By all the Gods, I pray
thee speak plain."

_Percalus._ "If Pausanias be recalled, wouldst thou still go to
Byzantium?"

_Lysander._ "No; but I think the Ephors have decided not so to
discredit their General."

_Percalus._ (shaking her head incredulously). "Count not on their
decision so surely, valiant warrior; and suppose that Pausanias is
recalled, and that some one else is sent in his place whose absence
would prevent thy obtaining that consent thou covetest, and so
frustrate thy designs on--on--(she added, blushing scarlet)--on these
poor locks of mine."

_Lysander._ (starting). "Oh, Percalus, do I conceive thee aright?
Hast thou any reason to think that thy father Dorcis will be sent to
replace Pausanias--the great Pausanias!"

_Percalus._ (a little offended at a tone of expression which seemed to
slight her father's pretensions). "Dorcis, my father, is a warrior
whom Sparta reckons second to none; a most brave captain, and every
inch a Spartan; but--but--"

_Lysander._ "Percalus, do not trifle with me. Thou knowest how my
fate has been linked to the Regent's. Thou must have intelligence not
shared even by my father, himself an Ephor.--What is it?"

_Percalus._ "Thou wilt be secret, my Lysander, for what I may tell
thee I can only learn at the hearth-stone."

_Lysander._ "Fear me not. Is not all between us a secret?"

_Percalus._ "Well, then, Periclides and my father, as thou art aware,
are near kinsmen. And when the Ionian Envoys first arrived, it was
my father who was specially appointed to see to their fitting
entertainment. And that same night I overheard Dorcis say to my
mother, 'If I could succeed Pausanias, and conclude this war, I should
be consoled for not having commanded at Platam.' And my mother, who is
proud for her husband's glory, as a woman should be, said, 'Why not
strain every nerve as for a crown in Olympia? Periclides will aid
thee--thou wilt win.'"

_Lysander._ "But that was the first night of the Ionian's arrival."

_Percalus._ "Since then, I believe that thy father and others of the
Ephors overruled Periclides and Zeuxidamus, for I have heard all that
passed between my father and mother on the subject. But early this
morning, while my mother was assisting to attire me for the festival,
Periclides himself called at our house, and before I came from, home,
my mother, after a short conference with Dorcis, said to me, in the
exuberance of her joy, 'Go, child, and call here all the maidens, as
thy father ere long will go to outshine all the Grecian chiefs.'
So that if my father does go, thou wilt remain in Sparta. Then, my
beloved Lysander--and--and--but what ails thee? Is that thought so
sorrowful?"

_Lysander_. "Pardon me, pardon; thou art a Spartan maid; thou must
comprehend what should be felt by a Spartan soldier when he thinks of
humiliation and ingratitude to his chief. Gods! the man who rolled
back the storm of the Mede to be insulted in the face of Hellas by the
government of his native city! The blush of shame upon his cheek burns
my own."

The warrior bowed his face in his clasped hands.

Not a resentful thought natural to female vanity and exacting
affection then crossed the mind of the Spartan girl. She felt at once,
by the sympathy of kindred nurture, all that was torturing her lover.
She was even prouder of him that he forgot her for the moment to be
so truthful to his chief; and abandoning the innocent coyness she had
before shown, she put her arm round his neck with a pure and sisterly
fondness, and, kissing his brow, whispered soothingly, "It is for
me to ask pardon, that I did not think of this--that I spoke so
foolishly; but comfort--thy chief is not disgraced even by recall. Let
them recall Pausanias, they cannot recall his glory. When, in
Sparta, did we ever hold a brave man discredited by obedience to the
government? None are disgraced who do not disgrace themselves."

"Ah! my Percalus, so I should say; but so will not think Pausanias,
nor the allies; and in this slight to him I see the shadow of the
Erinnys. But it may not be true yet; nor can Periclides of himself
dispose thus of the Lacedaemonian armies."

"We will hope so, dear Lysander," said Percalus, who, born to be man's
helpmate, then only thought of consoling and cheering him.

"And if thou dost return to the camp, tarry as long as thou wilt, thou
wilt find Percalus the same."

"The Gods bless thee, maiden!" said Lysander, with grateful passion,
"and blessed be the State that rears such women; elsewhere Greece
knows them not."

"And does Greece elsewhere know such men?" asked Percalus, raising her
graceful head. "But so late--is it possible? See where the shadows are
falling! Thou wilt but be in time for thy pheidition. Farewell."

"But when to meet again?"

"Alas! when we can," She sprang lightly away; then, turning her face
as she fled, added, "Look out! thou wert taught to steal in thy
boyhood--steal an interview. I will be thy accomplice."

Notes:

[1] Except occasionally the dry sudorific bath, all warm bathing was
strictly forbidden as enervating.

[2] An evident exaggeration. The Spartans had too great a regard for
the physical gifts as essential to warlike uses, to permit cruelties
that would have blinded their young warriors. And they even forbade
the practice of the pancratium as ferocious and needlessly dangerous
to life.




CHAPTER VII.


That night, as Agesilaus was leaving the public table at which he
supped, Periclides, who was one of the same company, but who had been
unusually silent during the entertainment, approached him, and said,
"Let us walk towards thy home together; the moon is up, and will
betray listeners to our converse should there be any."

"And in default of the moon, thy years, if not yet mine, permit thee a
lanthorn, Periclides."

"I have not drunk enough to need it," answered the Chief of the
Ephors, with unusual pleasantry; "but as thou art the younger man, I
will lean on thine arm, so as to be closer to thine ear."

"Thou hast something secret and grave to say, then?"

Periclides nodded.

As they ascended the rugged acclivity, different groups, equally
returning home from the public tables, passed them. Though the sacred
festival had given excuse for prolonging the evening meal, and the
wine-cup had been replenished beyond the abstemious wont, still each
little knot of revellers passed, and dispersed in a sober and decorous
quiet which perhaps no other eminent city in Greece could have
exhibited; young and old equally grave and noiseless. For the Spartan
youth, no fair Hetaerae then opened homes adorned with flowers, and
gay with wit, no less than alluring with beauty; but as the streets
grew more deserted, there stood in the thick shadow of some angle, or
glided furtively by some winding wall, a bridegroom lover, tarrying
till all was still, to steal to the arms of the lawful wife, whom for
years perhaps he might not openly acknowledge, and carry in triumph to
his home.

But not of such young adventurers thought the sage Periclides, though
his voice was as low as a lover's "hist!" and his step as stealthy as
a bridegroom's tread.

"My friend," said he, "with the faint grey of the dawn there comes
to my house a new messenger from the camp, and the tidings he brings
change all our decisions. The Festival does not permit us as Ephors to
meet in public, or, at least, I think thou wilt agree with me it is
more prudent not to do so. All we should do now, should be in strict
privacy."

"But hush! from whom the message--Pausanias?"

"No--from Aristides the Athenian."

"And to what effect?"

"The Ionians have revolted from the Spartan hegemony, and ranged
themselves under the Athenian flag."

"Gods! what I feared has already come to pass."

"And Aristides writes to me, with whom you remember that he has the
hospitable ties, that the Athenians cannot abandon their Ionian allies
and kindred who thus appeal to them, and that if Pausanias remain,
open war may break out between the two divisions into which the fleet
of Hellas is now rent."

"This must not be, for it would be war at sea; we and the
Peloponnesians have far the fewer vessels, the less able seamen.
Sparta would be conquered." "Rather than Sparta should be conquered,
must we not recall her General?"

"I would give all my lands, and sink out of the rank of Equal, that
this had not chanced," said Agesilaus, bitterly.

"Hist! hist! not so loud."

"I had hoped we might induce the Regent himself to resign the command,
and so have been spared the shame and the pain of an act that affects
the hero-blood of our kings. Could not that be done yet?"

"Dost thou think so? Pausanias resign in the midst of a mutiny? Thou
canst not know the man."

"Thou art right--impossible. I see no option now. He must be recalled.
But the Spartan hegemony is then gone--gone for ever--gone to Athens."

"Not so. Sparta hath many a worthy son beside this too arrogant
Heracleid."

"Yes; but where his genius of command?--where his immense
renown?--where a man, I say, not in Sparta, but in all Greece, fit to
cope with Aristides and Cimon in the camp, with Themistocles in the
city of our rivals? If Pausanias fails, who succeeds?"

"Be not deceived. What must be, must; it is but a little time earlier
than Necessity would have fixed. Wouldst thou take the command?"

"I? The Gods forbid."

"Then, if thou wilt not, I know but one man."

"And who is he?"

"Dorcis."

Agesilaus started, and, by the light of the moon, gazed full upon the
face of the chief Ephor.

"Thy kinsman, Dorcis? Ah! Periclides, hast thou schemed this from the
first?"

Periclides changed colour at finding himself thus abruptly detected,
and as abruptly charged; however, he answered with laconic dryness,--

"Friend, did I scheme the revolt of the Ionians? But if thou knowest a
better man than Dorcis, speak. Is he not brave?"

"Yes."

"Skilful?"

"No. Tut! thou art as conscious as I am that thou mightest as well
compare the hat on thy brow to the brain it hides as liken the stolid
Dorcis to the fiery but profound Heracleid."

"Ay, ay! But there is one merit the hat has which the brow has not--it
can do no harm. Shall we send our chiefs to be made worse men by
Eastern manners? Dorcis has dull wit, granted; no arts can corrupt
it; he may not save the hegemony, but he will return as he went, a
Spartan."

"Thou art right again, and a wise man, Periclides. I submit. Thou hast
my vote for Dorcis. What else hast thou designed? for I see now that
whatever thou designest that wilt thou accomplish; and our meeting on
the Archeion is but an idle form."

"Nay, nay," said Periclides, with his austere smile, "thou givest me
a wit and a will that I have not. But as chief of the Ephors I watch
over the State. And though I design nothing, this I would counsel,--On
the day we answer the Ionians, we shall tell them, 'What ye ask, we
long since proposed to do.' And Dorcis is already on the seas as
successor to Pausanias."

"When will Dorcis leave?" said Agesilaus, curtly.

"If the other Ephors concur, to-morrow night."

"Here we are at my doors, wilt thou not enter?"

"No. I have others yet to see. I knew we should be of the same mind."

Agesilaus made no reply; but as he entered the court-yard of his
house, he muttered uneasily,--"And if Lysander is right, and Sparta
is too small for Pausanias, do not we bring back a giant who will
widen it to his own girth, and rase the old foundations to make room
for the buildings he would add?"

       *       *       *       *       *

(UNFINISHED.) The pages covered by the manuscript of this uncompleted
story of "Pausanias" are scarcely more numerous than those which its
author has filled with the notes made by him from works consulted with
special reference to the subject of it. Those notes (upon Greek and
Persian antiquities) are wholly without interest for the general
public. They illustrate the author's conscientious industry, but they
afford no clue to the plot of his romance. Under the sawdust, however,
thus fallen in the industrial process of an imaginative work,
unhappily unfinished, I have found two specimens of original
composition. They are rough sketches of songs expressly composed for
"Pausanias;" and, since they are not included in the foregoing portion
of it, I think they may properly be added here. The unrhymed lyrics
introduced by my father into some of the opening chapters of this
romance appear to have been suggested by some fragments of Mimnermus,
and composed about the same time as "The Lost Tales of Miletus."
Indeed, one of them has been already printed in that work. The
following verses, however, which are rhymed, bear evidence of having
been composed at a much earlier period. I know not whether it was
my father's intention to discard them altogether, or to alter them
materially, or to insert them without alteration in some later portion
of the romance. But I print them here precisely as they are written.

L.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOR PAUSANIAS.

_Partially borrowed from Aristophanes' "Peace,"_ v. 1127, etc.

    Away, away, with the helm and greaves,
       Away with the leeks and cheese![1]
    I have conquer'd my passion for wounds and blows,
    And the worst that I wish to the worst of my foes
          Is the glory and gain
          Of a year's campaign
       On a diet of leeks and cheese.

        *        *        *        *        *

    I love to drink by my own warm hearth,
    Nourisht with logs from the pine-clad heights,
       Which were hewn in the blaze of the summer sun
    To treasure his rays for the winter nights
       On the hearth where my grandam spun.

    I love to drink of the grape I press,
      And to drink with a friend of yore;
    Quick! bring me a bough from the myrtle tree
      Which is budding afresh by Nicander's door.
    Tell Nicander himself he must sup with me,
    And along with the bough from his myrtle tree
    We will circle the lute, in a choral glee
      To the goddess of corn and peace.
    For Nicander and I were fast friends at school.
    Here he comes! We are boys once more.

    When the grasshopper chaunts in the bells of thyme
    I love to watch if the Lemnian grape[2]
    Is donning the purple that decks its prime;
    And, as I sit at my porch to see,
    With my little one trying to scale my knee,
    To join in the grasshopper's chaunt, and sing
    To Apollo and Pan from the heart of Spring.[3]
              Listen, O list!

    Hear ye not, neighbours, the voice of Peace?
    "The swallow I hear in the household eaves."
      Io Aegien! Peace!
    "And the skylark at poise o'er the bended sheaves,"
      Io Aegien! Peace!
    Here and there, everywhere, hear we Peace,
    Hear her, and see her, and clasp her--Peace!
    The grasshopper chaunts in the bells of thyme,
    And the halcyon is back to her nest in Greece!


IN PRAISE OF THE ATHENIAN KNIGHTS.

_Imitated from the "Knights" of Aristophanes_, v. 505, etc.

    Chaunt the fame of the Knights, or in war or in peace,
    Chaunt the darlings of Athens,[4] the bulwarks of Greece
    Pressing foremost to glory, on wave and on shore,
    Where the steed has no footing they win with the oar.[5]

    On their bosoms the battle splits, wasting its shock.
    If they charge like the whirlwind, they stand like the rock.
    Ha! they count not the numbers, they scan not the ground,
    When a foe comes in sight on his lances they bound.

    Fails a foot in its speed? heed it not. One and all[6]
    Spurn the earth that they spring from, and own not a fall.
    O the darlings of Athens, the bulwarks of Greece,
    Wherefore envy the lovelocks they perfume in peace!

    Wherefore scowl if they fondle a quail or a dove,
    Or inscribe on a myrtle, the names that they love?
    Does Alcides not teach us how valour is mild?
    Lo, at rest from his labours he plays with a child.

    When the slayer of Python has put down his bow,
    By his lute and his lovelocks Apollo we know.
    Fear'd, O rowers, those gallants their beauty to spoil
    When they sat on your benches, and shared in your toil!

    When with laughter they row'd to your cry "Hippopai,"
    "On, ye coursers of wood, for the palm wreath, away!"
    Did those dainty youths ask you to store in your holds
    Or a cask from their crypt or a lamb from their folds?

    No, they cried, "We are here both to fight and to fast,
    Place us first in the fight, at the board serve us last!
    Wheresoever is peril, we knights lead the way,
    Wheresoever is hardship, we claim it as pay.

    "Call us proud, O Athenians, we know it full well,
    And we give you the life we're too haughty to sell."
    Hail the stoutest in war, hail the mildest in peace,
    Hail the darlings of Athens, the bulwarks of Greece!


Notes:

[1] [Greek: Turou te kai kromuon]. Cheese and onions, the rations
furnished to soldiers in campaign.

[2] It ripened earlier than the others. The words of the Chorus are,
[Greek: tas Laemnias ampelous ei pepainousin aedae].

[3]: Variation--"What a blessing is life in a noon of Spring."

[4] Variation--"The adorners of Athens, the bulwarks of Greece."

[5] Variation--"Keenest racers to glory, on wave or on shore, By the
rush of the steed or the stroke of the oar!"

[6] Variation--"Falls there one? never help him! Our knights one and
all."




THE HAUNTED AND THE HAUNTERS:

OR, THE HOUSE AND THE BRAIN


[This tale first appeared in _Blackwood's Magazine_, August, 1859. A
portion of it as then published is now suppressed, because encroaching
too much on the main plot of the "Strange Story." As it stands,
however, it may be considered the preliminary outline of that more
elaborate attempt to construct an interest akin to that which our
forefathers felt in tales of witchcraft and ghostland, out of ideas
and beliefs which have crept into fashion in the society of our own
day. There has, perhaps, been no age in which certain phenomena
that in all ages have been produced by, or upon, certain physical
temperaments, have excited so general a notice,--more perhaps among
the educated classes than the uneducated. Nor do I believe that there
is any age in which those phenomena have engendered throughout a wider
circle a more credulous superstition. But, on the other hand, there
has certainly been no age in which persons of critical and inquisitive
intellect--seeking to divest what is genuine in these apparent
vagaries of Nature from the cheats of venal impostors and the
exaggeration of puzzled witnesses--have more soberly endeavoured
to render such exceptional thaumaturgia of philosophical use,
in enlarging our conjectural knowledge of the complex laws of
being--sometimes through physiological, sometimes through metaphysical
research. Without discredit, however, to the many able and
distinguished speculators on so vague a subject, it must be observed
that their explanations as yet have been rather ingenious than
satisfactory. Indeed, the first requisites for conclusive theory are
at present wanting. The facts are not sufficiently generalized, and
the evidences for them have not been sufficiently tested.

It is just when elements of the marvellous are thus struggling between
superstition and philosophy, that they fall by right to the domain of
Art--the art of poet or tale-teller. They furnish the constructor
of imaginative fiction with materials for mysterious terror of a
character not exhausted by his predecessors, and not foreign to the
notions that float on the surface of his own time; while they allow
him to wander freely over that range of conjecture which is favourable
to his purposes, precisely because science itself has not yet
disenchanted that debateable realm of its haunted shadows and goblin
lights.]


A friend of mine, who is a man of letters and a philosopher, said to
me one day, as if between jest and earnest,--" Fancy! since we last
met, I have discovered a haunted house in the midst of London."

"Really haunted?--and by what? ghosts?"

"Well, I can't answer that question; all I know is this--six weeks ago
my wife and I were in search of a furnished apartment. Passing a quiet
street, we saw on the window of one of the houses a bill, 'Apartments
Furnished.' The situation suited us: we entered the house--liked the
rooms--engaged them by the week--and left them the third day. No power
on earth could have reconciled my wife to stay longer; and I don't
wonder at it."

"What did you see?"

"Excuse me--I have no desire to be ridiculed as a superstitious
dreamer--nor, on the other hand, could I ask you to accept on my
affirmation what you would hold to be incredible without the evidence
of your own senses. Let me only say this, it was not so much what we
saw or heard (in which you might fairly suppose that we were the dupes
of our own excited fancy, or the victims of imposture in others) that
drove us away, as it was an undefinable terror which seized both of us
whenever we passed by the door of a certain unfurnished room, in which
we neither saw nor heard anything. And the strangest marvel of all
was, that for once in my life I agreed with my wife, silly woman
though she be--and allowed, after the third night, that it was
impossible to stay a fourth in that house. Accordingly, on the fourth
morning I summoned the woman who kept the house and attended on us,
and told her that the rooms did not quite suit us, and we would not
stay out our week. She said, dryly, 'I know why; you have stayed
longer than any other lodger. Few ever stayed a second night; none
before you a third. But I take it they have been very kind to you.'

"'They--who?' I asked, affecting to smile.

"'Why, they who haunt the house, whoever they are. I don't mind them;
I remember them many years ago, when I lived in this house, not as a
servant; but I know they will be the death of me some day. I don't
care--I'm old, and must die soon anyhow; and then I shall be with
them, and in this house still.' The woman spoke with so dreary
a calmness, that really it was a sort of awe that prevented my
conversing with her further. I paid for my week, and too happy were my
wife and I to get off so cheaply."

"You excite my curiosity," said I; "nothing I should like better than
to sleep in a haunted house. Pray give me the address of the one which
you left so ignominiously."

My friend gave me the address; and when we parted, I walked straight
towards the house thus indicated.

It is situated on the north side of Oxford Street, in a dull but
respectable thoroughfare. I found the house shut up--no bill at
the window, and no response to my knock. As I was turning away, a
beer-boy, collecting pewter pots at the neighbouring areas, said to
me, "Do you want any one at that house, sir?"

"Yes, I heard it was to be let."

"Let!--why, the woman who kept it is dead--has been dead these three
weeks, and no one can be found to stay there, though Mr. J---- offered
ever so much. He offered mother, who chars for him, 1 a week just to
open and shut the windows, and she would not."

"Would not!--and why?"

"The house is haunted; and the old woman who kept it was found dead in
her bed, with her eyes wide open. They say the devil strangled her."

"Pooh!--you speak of Mr. J----. Is he the owner of the house?"

"Yes."

"Where does he live?"

"In G---- Street, No. --."

"What is he?--in any business?"

"No, sir--nothing particular; a single gentleman."

I gave the pot-boy the gratuity earned by his liberal information, and
proceeded to Mr. J----, in G---- Street, which was close by the street
that boasted the haunted house. I was lucky enough to find Mr.
J---- at home--an elderly man, with intelligent countenance and
prepossessing manners.

I communicated my name and my business frankly. I said I heard the
house was considered to be haunted--that I had a strong desire to
examine a house with so equivocal a reputation--that I should be
greatly obliged if he would allow me to hire it, though only for a
night. I was willing to pay for that privilege whatever he might be
inclined to ask. "Sir," said Mr. J----, with great courtesy, "the
house is at your service, for as short or as long a time as you
please. Rent is out of the question--the obligation will be on my side
should you be able to discover the cause of the strange phenomena
which at present deprive it of all value. I cannot let it, for I
cannot even get a servant to keep it in order or answer the door.
Unluckily the house is haunted, if I may use that expression, not only
by night, but by day; though at night the disturbances are of a more
unpleasant and sometimes of a more alarming character. The poor old
woman who died in it three weeks ago was a pauper whom I took out of
a workhouse, for in her childhood she had been known to some of my
family, and had once been in such good circumstances that she had
rented that house of my uncle. She was a woman of superior education
and strong mind, and was the only person I could ever induce to remain
in the house. Indeed, since her death, which was sudden, and the
coroner's inquest, which gave it a notoriety in the neighbourhood, I
have so despaired of finding any person to take charge of the house,
much more a tenant, that I would willingly let it rent-free for a year
to any one who would pay its rates and taxes."

"How long is it since the house acquired this sinister character?"

"That I can scarcely tell you, but very many years since. The old
woman I spoke of said it was haunted when she rented it between thirty
and forty years ago. The fact is, that my life has been spent in the
East Indies, and in the civil service of the Company. I returned to
England last year, on inheriting the fortune of an uncle, among
whose possessions was the house in question. I found it shut up and
uninhabited. I was told that it was haunted, that no one would inhabit
it. I smiled at what seemed to me so idle a story. I spent some money
in repairing it--added to its old-fashioned furniture a few modern
articles--advertised it, and obtained a lodger for a year. He was a
colonel retired on half-pay. He came in with his family, a son and a
daughter, and four or five servants: they all left the house the next
day; and, although each of them declared that he had seen something
different from that which had scared the others, a something still was
equally terrible to all. I really could not in conscience sue, nor
even blame, the colonel for breach of agreement. Then I put in the
old woman I have spoken of, and she was empowered to let the house in
apartments. I never had one lodger who stayed more than three days.
I do not tell you their stories--to no two lodgers have there been
exactly the same phenomena repeated. It is better that you should
judge for yourself, than enter the house with an imagination
influenced by previous narratives; only be prepared to see and to
hear something or other, and take whatever precautions you yourself
please."

"Have you never had a curiosity yourself to pass a night in that
house?"

"Yes. I passed not a night, but three hours in broad daylight alone in
that house. My curiosity is not satisfied, but it is quenched. I have
no desire to renew the experiment. You cannot complain, you see,
sir, that I am not sufficiently candid; and unless your interest be
exceedingly eager and your nerves unusually strong, I honestly add,
that I advise you not to pass a night in that house."

"My interest _is_ exceedingly keen," said I, "and though only a coward
will boast of his nerves in situations wholly unfamiliar to him, yet
my nerves have been seasoned in such variety of danger that I have the
right to rely on them--even in a haunted house."

Mr. J---- said very little more; he took the keys of the house out
of his bureau, gave them to me,--and, thanking him cordially for his
frankness, and his urbane concession to my wish, I carried off my
prize.

Impatient for the experiment, as soon as I reached home, I summoned my
confidential servant--a young man of gay spirits, fearless temper, and
as free from superstitious prejudice as any one I could think of.

"F----," said I, "you remember in Germany how disappointed we were at
not finding a ghost in that old castle, which was said to be haunted
by a headless apparition? Well, I have heard of a house in London
which, I have reason to hope, is decidedly haunted. I mean to sleep
there to-night. From what I hear, there is no doubt that something
will allow itself to be seen or to be heard--something, perhaps,
excessively horrible. Do you think if I take you with me, I may rely
on your presence of mind, whatever may happen?"

"Oh, sir! pray trust me," answered F----, grinning with delight.

"Very well; then here are the keys of the house--this is the address.
Go now,--select for me any bedroom you please; and since the house
has not been inhabited for weeks, make up a good fire--air the bed
well--see, of course, that there are candles as well as fuel. Take
with you my revolver and my dagger--so much for my weapons--arm
yourself equally well; and if we are not a match for a dozen ghosts,
we shall be but a sorry couple of Englishmen."

I was engaged for the rest of the day on business so urgent that I had
not leisure to think much on the nocturnal adventure to which I had
plighted my honour. I dined alone, and very late, and while dining,
read, as is my habit. I selected one of the volumes of Macaulay's
Essays. I thought to myself that I would take the book with me; there
was so much of healthfulness in the style, and practical life in the
subjects, that it would serve as an antidote against the influences of
superstitious fancy.

Accordingly, about half-past nine, I put the book into my pocket,
and strolled leisurely towards the haunted house. I took with me
a favourite dog,--an exceedingly sharp, bold, and vigilant
bull-terrier,--a dog fond of prowling about strange ghostly corners
and passages at night in search of rats--a dog of dogs for a ghost.

It was a summer night, but chilly, the sky somewhat gloomy and
overcast. Still there was a moon--faint and sickly, but still a
moon--and if the clouds permitted, after midnight it would be
brighter. I reached the house, knocked, and my servant opened with a
cheerful smile.

"All right, sir, and very comfortable."

"Oh!" said I, rather disappointed; "have you not seen nor heard
anything remarkable?"

"Well, sir, I must own I have heard something queer."

"What?--what?"

"The sound of feet pattering behind me; and once or twice small noises
like whispers close at my ear--nothing more."

"You are not at all frightened?"

"I! not a bit of it, sir;" and the man's bold look reassured me on one
point--viz. that happen what might, he would not desert me.

We were in the hall, the street-door closed, and my attention was
now drawn to my dog. He had at first run in eagerly enough, but had
sneaked back to the door, and was scratching and whining to get out.
After patting him on the head, and encouraging him gently, the dog
seemed to reconcile himself to the situation, and followed me and
F---- through the house, but keeping close at my heels instead of
hurrying inquisitively in advance, which was his usual and normal
habit in all strange places. We first visited the subterranean
apartments, the kitchen and other offices, and especially the cellars,
in which last there were two or three bottles of wine, still left in
a bin, covered with cobwebs, and evidently, by their appearance,
undisturbed for many years. It was clear that the ghosts were not
winebibbers. For the rest we discovered nothing of interest. There was
a gloomy little backyard, with very high walls. The stones of this
yard were very damp; and what with the damp, and what with the dust
and smoke-grime on the pavement, our feet left a slight impression
where we passed. And now appeared the first strange phenomenon
witnessed by myself in this strange abode.

I saw, just before me, the print of a foot suddenly form itself, as
it were. I stopped, caught hold of my servant, and pointed to it. In
advance of that footprint as suddenly dropped another. We both saw it.
I advanced quickly to the place; the footprint kept advancing before
me, a small footprint--the foot of a child: the impression was too
faint thoroughly to distinguish the shape, but it seemed to us both
that it was the print of a naked foot. This phenomenon ceased when we
arrived at the opposite wall, nor did it repeat itself on returning.
We remounted the stairs, and entered the rooms on the ground floor, a
dining parlour, a small back-parlour, and a still smaller third room
that had been probably appropriated to a footman--all still as death.
We then visited the drawing-rooms, which seemed fresh and new. In the
front room I seated myself in an arm-chair. F---- placed on the table
the candlestick with which he had lighted us. I told him to shut the
door. As he turned to do so, a chair opposite to me moved from the
wall quickly and noiselessly, and dropped itself about a yard from my
own chair, immediately fronting it.

"Why, this is better than the turning-tables," said I, with a
half-laugh; and as I laughed, my dog put back his head and howled.

F----, coming back, had not observed the movement of the chair. He
employed himself now in stilling the dog. I continued to gaze on the
chair, and fancied I saw on it a pale blue misty outline of a human
figure, but an outline so indistinct that I could only distrust my own
vision. The dog now was quiet.

"Put back that chair opposite to me," said I to F----; "put it back to
the wall."

F---- obeyed. "Was that you, sir?" said he, turning abruptly.

"I!--what?"

"Why, something struck me. I felt it sharply on the shoulder--just
here."

"No," said I. "But we have jugglers present, and though we may not
discover their tricks, we shall catch _them_ before they frighten
_us_."

We did not stay long in the drawing-rooms--in fact, they felt so damp
and so chilly that I was glad to get to the fire upstairs. We locked
the doors of the drawing-rooms--a precaution which, I should observe,
we had taken with all the rooms we had searched below. The bedroom my
servant had selected for me was the best on the floor--a large one,
with two windows fronting the street. The four-posted bed, which took
up no inconsiderable space, was opposite to the fire, which burnt
clear and bright; a door in the wall to the left, between the bed and
the window, communicated with the room which my servant appropriated
to himself. This last was a small room with a sofa-bed, and had no
communication with the landing-place--no other door but that which
conducted to the bedroom I was to occupy. On either side of my
fireplace was a cupboard, without locks, flush with the wall, and
covered with the same dull-brown paper. We examined these cupboards
--only hooks to suspend female dresses--nothing else; we sounded the
walls--evidently solid--the outer walls of the building. Having
finished the survey of these apartments, warmed myself a few moments,
and lighted my cigar, I then, still accompanied by F----, went forth
to complete my reconnoitre. In the landing-place there was another
door; it was closed firmly. "Sir," said my servant, in surprise, "I
unlocked this door with all the others when I first came; it cannot
have got locked from the inside, for--"

Before he had finished his sentence, the door, which neither of us
then was touching, opened quietly of itself. We looked at each other a
single instant. The same thought seized both--some human agency might
be detected here. I rushed in first, my servant followed. A small
blank dreary room without furniture--a few empty boxes and hampers
in a corner--a small window--the shutters closed--not even a
fire-place--no other door but that by which we had entered--no carpet
on the floor, and the floor seemed very old, uneven, worm-eaten,
mended here and there, as was shown by the whiter patches on the wood;
but no living being, and no visible place in which a living being
could have hidden. As we stood gazing round, the door by which we had
entered closed as quietly as it had before opened: we were imprisoned.

For the first time I felt a creep of undefinable horror. Not so my
servant. "Why, they don't think to trap us, sir; I could break that
trumpery door with a kick of my foot."

"Try first if it will open to your hand," said I, shaking off the
vague apprehension that had seized me, "while I unclose the shutters
and see what is without."

I unbarred the shutters--the window looked on the little back yard I
have before described; there was no ledge without--nothing to break
the sheer descent of the wall. No man getting out of that window would
have found any footing till he had fallen on the stones below.

F----, meanwhile, was vainly attempting to open the door. He now
turned round to me and asked my permission to use force. And I should
here state, in justice to the servant, that, far from evincing any
superstitious terrors, his nerve, composure, and even gaiety amidst
circumstances so extraordinary, compelled my admiration, and made me
congratulate myself on having secured a companion in every way fitted
to the occasion. I willingly gave him the permission he required. But
though he was a remarkably strong man, his force was as idle as his
milder efforts; the door did not even shake to his stoutest kick.
Breathless and panting, he desisted. I then tried the door myself,
equally in vain. As I ceased from the effort, again that creep of
horror came over me; but this time it was more cold and stubborn. I
felt as if some strange and ghastly exhalation were rising up from
the chinks of that rugged floor, and filling the atmosphere with a
venomous influence hostile to human life. The door now very slowly and
quietly opened as of its own accord. We precipitated ourselves into
the landing-place. We both saw a large pale light--as large as the
human figure, but shapeless and unsubstantial--move before us, and
ascend the stairs that led from the landing into the attics. I
followed the light, and my servant followed me. It entered, to the
right of the landing, a small garret, of which the door stood open.
I entered in the same instant. The light then collapsed into a small
globule, exceedingly brilliant and vivid; rested a moment on a bed in
the corner, quivered, and vanished. We approached the bed and examined
it--a half-tester, such as is commonly found in attics devoted to
servants. On the drawers that stood near it we perceived an old faded
silk kerchief, with the needle still left in a rent half repaired. The
kerchief was covered with dust; probably it had belonged to the old
woman who had last died in that house, and this might have been her
sleeping room. I had sufficient curiosity to open the drawers: there
were a few odds and ends of female dress, and two letters tied round
with a narrow ribbon of faded yellow. I took the liberty to possess
myself of the letters. We found nothing else in the room worth
noticing--nor did the light reappear; but we distinctly heard, as we
turned to go, a pattering footfall on the floor--just before us.
We went through the other attics (in all four), the footfall still
preceding us. Nothing to be seen--nothing but the footfall heard. I
had the letters in my hand: just as I was descending the stairs I
distinctly felt my wrist seized, and a faint soft effort made to draw
the letters from my clasp. I only held them the more tightly, and the
effort ceased.

We regained the bedchamber appropriated to myself, and I then remarked
that my dog had not followed us when we had left it. He was thrusting
himself close to the fire, and trembling. I was impatient to examine
the letters; and while I read them, my servant opened a little box in
which he had deposited the weapons I had ordered him to bring; took
them out, placed them on a table close at my bed-head, and then
occupied himself in soothing the dog, who, however, seemed to heed him
very little.

The letters were short--they were dated; the dates exactly thirty-five
years ago. They were evidently from a lover to his mistress, or a
husband to some young wife. Not only the terms of expression, but a
distinct reference to a former voyage, indicated the writer to have
been a seafarer. The spelling and handwriting were those of a man
imperfectly educated, but still the language itself was forcible. In
the expressions of endearment there was a kind of rough wild love; but
here and there were dark unintelligible hints at some secret not of
love--some secret that seemed of crime. "We ought to love each other,"
was one of the sentences I remember, "for how every one else would
execrate us if all was known." Again: "Don't let any one be in the
same room with you at night--you talk in your sleep." And again:
"What's done can't be undone; and I tell you there's nothing against
us unless the dead could come to life." Here there was underlined in a
better handwriting (a female's), "They do!" At the end of the letter
latest in date the same female hand had written these words: "Lost at
sea the 4th of June, the same day as----."

I put down the letters, and began to muse over their contents.

Fearing, however, that the train of thought into which I fell might
unsteady my nerves, I fully determined to keep my mind in a fit state
to cope with whatever of marvellous the advancing night might bring
forth. I roused myself--laid the letters on the table--stirred up the
fire, which was still bright and cheering--and opened my volume of
Macaulay. I read quietly enough till about half-past eleven. I then
threw myself dressed upon the bed, and told my servant he might retire
to his own room, but must keep himself awake. I bade him leave open
the door between the two rooms. Thus alone, I kept two candles burning
on the table by my bed-head. I placed my watch beside the weapons, and
calmly resumed my Macaulay. Opposite to me the fire burned clear;
and on the hearthrug, seemingly asleep, lay the dog. In about twenty
minutes I felt an exceedingly cold air pass by my cheek, like a sudden
draught. I fancied the door to my right, communicating with the
landing-place, must have got open; but no--it was closed. I then
turned my glance to my left, and saw the flame of the candles
violently swayed as by a wind. At the same moment the watch beside
the revolver softly slid from the table--softly, softly--no visible
hand--it was gone. I sprang up, seizing the revolver with the one
hand, the dagger with the other: I was not willing that my weapons
should share the fate of the watch. Thus armed, I looked round the
floor--no sign of the watch. Three slow, loud, distinct knocks were
now heard at the bed-head; my servant culled out, "Is that you, sir?"

"No; be on your guard."

The dog now roused himself and sat on his haunches, his ears moving
quickly backwards and forwards. He kept his eyes fixed on me with a
look so strange that he concentred all my attention on himself. Slowly
he rose up, all his hair bristling, and stood perfectly rigid, and
with the same wild stare. I had no time, however, to examine the dog.
Presently my servant emerged from his room; and if ever I saw horror
in the human face, it was then. I should not have recognised him had
we met in the street, so altered was every lineament. He passed by me
quickly, saying in a whisper that seemed scarcely to come from his
lips, "Run--run! it is after me!" He gained the door to the landing,
pulled it open, and rushed forth. I followed him into the landing
involuntarily, calling him to stop; but, without heeding me, he
bounded down the stairs, clinging to the balusters, and taking several
steps at a time. I heard, where I stood, the street-door open--heard
it again clap to. I was left alone in the haunted house.

It was but for a moment that I remained undecided whether or not to
follow my servant; pride and curiosity alike forbade so dastardly a
flight. I reentered my room, closing the door after me, and proceeded
cautiously into the interior chamber. I encountered nothing to justify
my servant's terror. I again carefully examined the walls, to see if
there were any concealed door. I could find no trace of one--not even
a seam in the dull-brown paper with which the room was hung. How,
then, had the THING, whatever it was, which had so scared him,
obtained ingress except through my own chamber?

I returned to my room, shut and locked the door that opened upon the
interior one, and stood on the hearth, expectant and prepared. I now
perceived that the dog had slunk into an angle of the wall, and was
pressing himself close against it, as if literally striving to force
his way into it. I approached the animal and spoke to it; the poor
brute was evidently beside itself with terror. It showed all its
teeth, the slaver dropping from its jaws, and would certainly have
bitten me if I had touched it. It did not seem to recognise me.
Whoever has seen at the Zoological Gardens a rabbit fascinated by a
serpent, cowering in a corner, may form some idea of the anguish which
the dog exhibited. Finding all efforts to soothe the animal in vain,
and fearing that his bite might be as venomous in that state as in the
madness of hydrophobia, I left him alone, placed my weapons on the
table beside the fire, seated myself, and recommenced my Macaulay.

Perhaps, in order not to appear seeking credit for a courage, or
rather a coolness, which the reader may conceive I exaggerate, I may
be pardoned if I pause to indulge in one or two egotistical remarks.

As I hold presence of mind, or what is called courage, to be precisely
proportioned to familiarity with the circumstances that lead to it,
so I should say that I had been long sufficiently familiar with all
experiments that appertain to the Marvellous. I had witnessed many
very extraordinary phenomena in various parts of the world--phenomena
that would be either totally disbelieved if I stated them, or ascribed
to supernatural agencies. Now, my theory is that the Supernatural
is the Impossible, and that what is called supernatural is only
a something in the laws of nature of which we have been hitherto
ignorant. Therefore, if a ghost rise before me, I have not the right
to say, "So, then, the supernatural is possible," but rather, "So,
then, the apparition of a ghost is, contrary to received opinion,
within the laws of nature--i.e., not supernatural."

Now, in all that I had hitherto witnessed, and indeed in all the
wonders which the amateurs of mystery in our age record as facts, a
material living agency is always required. On the Continent you will
find still magicians who assert that they can raise spirits. Assume
for the moment that they assert truly, still the living material form
of the magician is present; and lie is the material agency by which,
from some constitutional peculiarities, certain strange phenomena, are
represented to your natural senses.

Accept, again, as truthful, the tales of Spirit Manifestation in
America--musical or other sounds--writings on paper, produced by no
discernible hand--articles of furniture moved without apparent human
agency--or the actual sight and touch of hands, to which no bodies
seem to belong--still there must be found the MEDIUM or living being,
with constitutional peculiarities capable of obtaining these signs. In
fine, in all such marvels, supposing even that there is no imposture,
there must be a human being like ourselves by whom, or through whom,
the effects presented to human beings are produced. It is so with the
now familiar phenomena of mesmerism or electro-biology; the mind of
the person operated on is affected through a material living agent.
Nor, supposing it true that a mesmerised patient can respond to
the will or passes of a mesmeriser a hundred miles distant, is the
response less occasioned by a material being; it may be through a
material fluid--call it Electric, call it Odic, call it what you
will--which has the power of traversing space and passing obstacles,
that the material effect is communicated from one to the other. Hence
all that I had hitherto witnessed, or expected to witness, in this
strange house, I believed to be occasioned through some agency or
medium as mortal as myself; and this idea necessarily prevented the
awe with which those who regard as supernatural, things that are not
within the ordinary operations of nature, might have been impressed by
the adventures of that memorable night.

As, then, it was my conjecture that all that was presented, or would
be presented to my senses, must originate in some human being gifted
by constitution with the power so to present them, and having some
motive so to do, I felt an interest in my theory which, in its way,
was rather philosophical than superstitious. And I can sincerely say
that I was in as tranquil a temper for observation as any practical
experimentalist could be in awaiting the effects of some rare, though
perhaps perilous, chemical combination. Of course, the more I kept my
mind detached from fancy, the more the temper fitted for observation
would be obtained; and I therefore riveted eye and thought on the
strong daylight sense in the page of my Macaulay.

I now became aware that something interposed between the page and the
light--the page was over-shadowed: I looked up, and I saw what I shall
find it very difficult, perhaps impossible, to describe.

It was a Darkness shaping itself forth from the air in very undefined
outline. I cannot say it was of a human form, and yet it had more
resemblance to a human form, or rather shadow, than to anything else.
As it stood, wholly apart and distinct from the air and the light
around it, its dimensions seemed gigantic, the summit nearly touching
the ceiling. While I gazed, a feeling of intense cold seized me. An
iceberg before me could not more have chilled me; nor could the cold
of an iceberg have been more purely physical. I feel convinced that
it was not the cold caused by fear. As I continued to gaze; I
thought--but this I cannot say with precision--that I distinguished
two eyes looking down on me from the height. One moment I fancied that
I distinguished them clearly, the next they seemed gone; but still two
rays of a pale-blue light frequently shot through the darkness, as from
the height on which I half believed, half doubted, that I had
encountered the eyes.

I strove to speak--my voice utterly failed me; I could only think to
myself, "Is this fear? it is _not_ fear!" I strove to rise--in vain;
I felt as if weighed down by an irresistible force. Indeed, my
impression was that of an immense and overwhelming Power opposed to my
volition;--that sense of utter inadequacy to cope with a force beyond
man's, which one may feel _physically_ in a storm at sea, in a
conflagration, or when confronting some terrible wild beast, or
rather, perhaps, the shark of the ocean, I felt _morally_. Opposed to
my will was another will, as far superior to its strength as storm,
fire, and shark are superior in material force to the force of man.

And now, as this impression grew on me--now came, at last,
horror--horror to a degree that no words can convey. Still I retained
pride, if not courage; and in my own mind I said, "This is horror, but
it is not fear; unless I fear I cannot be harmed; my reason rejects
this thing; it is an illusion--I do not fear." With a violent effort I
succeeded at last in stretching out my hand towards the weapon on
the table: as I did so, on the arm and shoulder I received a strange
shock, and my arm fell to my side powerless. And now, to add to my
horror, the light began slowly to wane from the candles--they were
not, as it were, extinguished, but their flame seemed very gradually
withdrawn: it was the same with the fire--the light was extracted from
the fuel; in a few minutes the room was in utter darkness. The dread
that came over me, to be thus in the dark with that dark Thing, whose
power was so intensely felt, brought a reaction of nerve. In fact,
terror had reached that climax, that either my senses must have
deserted me, or I must have burst through the spell. I did burst
through it. I found voice, though the voice was a shriek. I remember
that I broke forth with words like these--"I do not fear, my soul does
not fear;" and at the same time I found the strength to rise. Still
in that profound gloom I rushed to one of the windows--tore aside the
curtain--flung open the shutters; my first thought was--LIGHT. And
when I saw the moon high, clear, and calm, I felt a joy that almost
compensated for the previous terror. There, was the moon, there, was
also the light from the gas-lamps in the deserted slumberous street. I
turned to look back into the room; the moon penetrated its shadow
very palely and partially--but still there was light. The dark Thing,
whatever it might be, was gone--except that I could yet see a dim
shadow, which seemed the shadow of that shade, against the opposite
wall.

My eye now rested on the table, and from under the table (which was
without cloth or cover--an old mahogany round table) there rose a
hand, visible as far as the wrist. It was a hand, seemingly, as much
of flesh and blood as my own, but the hand of an aged person--lean,
wrinkled, small too--a woman's hand. That hand very softly closed on
the two letters that lay on the table: hand and letters both vanished.
There then came the same three loud measured knocks I had heard at the
bed-head before this extraordinary drama had commenced.

As those sounds slowly ceased, I felt the whole room vibrate sensibly;
and at the far end there rose, as from the floor, sparks or globules
like bubbles of light, many-coloured--green, yellow, fire-red, azure.
Up and down, to and fro, hither, thither, as tiny Will-o'-the-Wisps,
the sparks moved, slow or swift, each at its own caprice. A chair (as
in the drawing-room below) was now advanced from the wall without
apparent agency, and placed at the opposite side of the table.
Suddenly, as forth from the chair, there grew a shape--a woman's
shape. It was distinct as a shape of life--ghastly as a shape of
death. The face was that of youth, with a strange mournful beauty; the
throat and shoulders were bare, the rest of the form in a loose robe
of cloudy white. It began sleeking its long yellow hair, which fell
over its shoulders; its eyes were not turned towards me, but to the
door; it seemed listening, watching, waiting. The shadow of the shade
in the background grew darker; and again I thought I beheld the eyes
gleaming out from the summit of the shadow--eyes fixed upon that
shape.

As if from the door, though it did not open, there grew out another
shape, equally distinct, equally ghastly--a man's shape--a young
man's. It was in the dress of the last century, or rather in a
likeness of such dress (for both the male shape and the female,
though defined, were evidently unsubstantial, impalpable--simulacra
--phantasms); and there was something incongruous, grotesque, yet
fearful, in the contrast between the elaborate finery, the courtly
precision of that old-fashioned garb; with its ruffles and lace and
buckles, and the corpse-like aspect and ghost-like stillness of the
flitting wearer. Just as the male shape approached the female, the
dark Shadow started from the wall, all three for a moment wrapped in
darkness. When the pale light returned, the two phantoms were as if in
the grasp of the Shadow that towered between them; and there was a
blood-stain on the breast of the female; and the phantom male was
leaning on its phantom sword, and blood seemed trickling fast from the
ruffles, from the lace; and the darkness of the intermediate Shadow
swallowed them up--they were gone. And again the bubbles of light shot,
and sailed, and undulated, growing thicker and thicker and more wildly
confused in their movements.

The closet door to the right of the fireplace now opened, and from the
aperture there came the form of an aged woman. In her hand she held
letters,--the very letters over which I had seen _the_ Hand close; and
behind her I heard a footstep. She turned round as if to listen, and
then she opened the letters and seemed to read; and over her shoulder
I saw a livid face, the face as of a man long drowned--bloated,
bleached--seaweed tangled in its dripping hair; and at her feet lay a
form as of a corpse, and beside the corpse there cowered a child, a
miserable squalid child, with famine in its cheeks and fear in its
eyes. And as I looked in the old woman's face, the wrinkles and lines
vanished, and it became a face of youth--hard-eyed, stony, but still
youth; and the Shadow darted forth, and darkened over these phantoms
as it had darkened over the last.

Nothing now was left but the Shadow, and on that my eyes were intently
fixed, till again eyes grew out of the Shadow--malignant, serpent
eyes. And the bubbles of light again rose and fell, and in their
disordered, irregular, turbulent maze, mingled with the wan moonlight.
And now from these globules themselves, as from the shell of an egg,
monstrous things burst out; the air grew filled with them; larvae so
bloodless and so hideous that I can in no way describe them except
to remind the reader of the swarming life which the solar microscope
brings before his eyes in a drop of water--things transparent, supple,
agile, chasing each other, devouring each other--forms like nought
ever beheld by the naked eye. As the shapes were without symmetry, so
their movements were without order. In their very vagrancies there
was no sport; they came round me and round, thicker and faster and
swifter, swarming over my head, crawling over my right arm, which was
outstretched in involuntary command against all evil beings. Sometimes
I felt myself touched, but not by them; invisible hands touched me.
Once I felt the clutch as of cold soft fingers at my throat. I was
still equally conscious that if I gave way to fear I should be in
bodily peril; and I concentred all my faculties in the single focus of
resisting, stubborn will. And I turned my sight from the Shadow--above
all, from those strange serpent eyes--eyes that had now become
distinctly visible. For there, though in nought else around me, I was
aware that there was a WILL, and a will of intense, creative, working
evil, which might crush down my own.

The pale atmosphere in the room began now to redden as if in the air
of some near conflagration. The larvae grew lurid as things that live
in fire. Again the room vibrated; again were heard the three measured
knocks; and again all things were swallowed up in the darkness of
the dark Shadow, as if out of that darkness all had come, into that
darkness all returned.

As the gloom receded, the Shadow was wholly gone. Slowly as it had
been withdrawn, the flame grew again into the candles on the table,
again into the fuel in the grate. The whole room came once more
calmly, healthfully into sight.

The two doors were still closed, the door communicating with the
servant's room still locked. In the corner of the wall, into which he
had so convulsively niched himself, lay the dog. I called to him--no
movement; I approached--the animal was dead; his eyes protruded; his
tongue out of his mouth; the froth gathered round his jaws. I took him
in my arms; I brought him to the fire; I felt acute grief for the loss
of my poor favourite--acute self-reproach; I accused myself of his
death; I imagined he had died of fright. But what was my surprise on
finding that his neck was actually broken. Had this been done in the
dark?--must it not have been by a hand human as mine?--must there not
have been a human agency all the while in that room? Good cause to
suspect it. I cannot tell. I cannot do more than state the fact
fairly; the reader may draw his own inference.

Another surprising circumstance--my watch was restored to the table
from which it had been so mysteriously withdrawn; but it had stopped
at the very moment it was so withdrawn; nor, despite all the skill
of the watchmaker, has it ever gone since--that is, it will go in a
strange erratic way for a few hours, and then come to a dead stop--it
is worthless.

Nothing more chanced for the rest of the night. Nor, indeed, had I
long to wait before the dawn broke. Nor till it was broad daylight
did I quit the haunted house. Before I did so, I revisited the
little blind room in which my servant and myself had been for a
time imprisoned. I had a strong impression--for which I could not
account--that from that room had originated the mechanism of the
phenomena--if I may use the term--which had been experienced in my
chamber. And though I entered it now in the clear day, with the sun
peering through the filmy window, I still felt, as I stood on its
floor, the creep of the horror which I had first there experienced the
night before, and which had been so aggravated by what had passed in
my own chamber. I could not, indeed, bear to stay more than half a
minute within those walls. I descended the stairs, and again I heard
the footfall before me; and when I opened the street door, I thought I
could distinguish a very low laugh. I gained my own home, expecting to
find my runaway servant there. But he had not presented himself; nor
did I hear more of him for three days, when I received a letter from
him, dated from Liverpool, to this effect:--

"HONOURED SIR,--I humbly entreat your pardon, though I can scarcely
hope that you will think I deserve it, unless--which Heaven
forbid!--you saw what I did. I feel that it will be years before I
can recover myself; and as to being fit for service, it is out of the
question. I am therefore going to my brother-in-law at Melbourne. The
ship sails to-morrow. Perhaps the long voyage may set me up. I do
nothing now but start and tremble, and fancy IT is behind me. I humbly
beg you, honoured sir, to order my clothes, and whatever wages are
due to me, to be sent to my mother's, at Walworth,--John knows her
address."

The letter ended with additional apologies, somewhat incoherent, and
explanatory details as to effects that had been under the writer's
charge.

This flight may perhaps warrant a suspicion that the man wished to go
to Australia, and had been somehow or other fraudulently mixed up
with the events of the night. I say nothing in refutation of that
conjecture; rather, I suggest it as one that would seem to many
persons the most probable solution of improbable occurrences. My
belief in my own theory remained unshaken. I returned in the evening
to the house, to bring away in a hack cab the things I had left there,
with my poor dog's body. In this task I was not disturbed, nor did any
incident worth note befall me, except that still, on ascending and
descending the stairs, I heard the same footfall in advance. On
leaving the house, I went to Mr. J's. He was at home. I returned him
the keys, told him that my curiosity was sufficiently gratified, and
was about to relate quickly what had passed, when he stopped me, and
said, though with much politeness, that he had no longer any interest
in a mystery which none had ever solved.

I determined at least to tell him of the two letters I had read, as
well as of the extraordinary manner in which they had disappeared, and
I then inquired if he thought they had been addressed to the woman who
had died in the house, and if there were anything in her early history
which could possibly confirm the dark suspicions to which the letters
gave rise. Mr. J---- seemed startled, and, after musing a few moments,
answered, "I am but little acquainted with the woman's earlier
history, except, as I before told you, that her family were known to
mine. But you revive some vague reminiscences to her prejudice. I will
make inquiries, and inform you of their result. Still, even if we
could admit the popular superstition that a person who had been either
the perpetrator or the victim of dark crimes in life could revisit, as
a restless spirit, the scene in which those crimes had been committed,
I should observe that the house was infested by strange sights and
sounds before the old woman died--you smile--what would you say?"

"I would say this, that I am convinced, if we could get to the bottom
of these mysteries, we should find a living human agency."

"What! you believe it is all an imposture? for what object?"

"Not an imposture in the ordinary sense of the word. If suddenly I
were to sink into a deep sleep, from which you could not awake me, but
in that sleep could answer questions with an accuracy which I could
not pretend to when awake--tell you what money you had in your
pocket--nay, describe your very thoughts--it is not necessarily an
imposture, any more than it is necessarily supernatural. I should be,
unconsciously to myself, under a mesmeric influence, conveyed to me
from a distance by a human being who had acquired power over me by
previous _rapport_."

"But if a mesmeriser could so affect another living being, can you
suppose that a mesmeriser could also affect inanimate objects: move
chairs--open and shut doors?"

"Or impress our senses with the belief in such effects--we never
having been _en rapport_ with the person acting on us? No. What is
commonly called mesmerism could not do this; but there may be a power
akin to mesmerism, and superior to it--the power that in the old
days was called Magic. That such a power may extend to all inanimate
objects of matter, I do not say; but if so, it would not be against
nature--it would be only a rare power in nature which might be given
to constitutions with certain peculiarities, and cultivated by
practice to an extraordinary degree. That such a power might extend
over the dead--that is, over certain thoughts and memories that the
dead may still retain--and compel, not that which ought properly to
be called the SOUL, and which is for beyond human reach, but rather a
phantom of what has been most earth-stained on earth, to make itself
apparent to our senses--is a very ancient though obsolete theory, upon
which I will hazard no opinion. But I do not conceive the power would
be supernatural. Let me illustrate what I mean from an experiment
which Paracelsus describes as not difficult, and which the author of
the _Curiosities of Literature_ cites as credible:--A flower perishes;
you burn it. Whatever were the elements of that flower while it lived
are gone, dispersed, you know not whither; you can never discover nor
re-collect them. But you can, by chemistry, out of the burnt dust of
that flower, raise a spectrum of the flower, just as it seemed in
life. It may be the same with the human being. The soul has as much
escaped you as the essence or elements of the flower. Still you
may make a spectrum of it. And this phantom, though in the popular
superstition it is held to be the soul of the departed, must not be
confounded with the true soul; it is but the eidolon of the dead form.
Hence, like the best-attested stories of ghosts or spirits, the thing
that most strikes us is the absence of what we hold to be soul; that
is, of superior emancipated intelligence. These apparitions come for
little or no object--they seldom speak when they do come; if they
speak, they utter no ideas above those of an ordinary person on earth.
American spirit-seers have published volumes of communications in
prose and verse, which they assert to be given in the names of the
most illustrious dead--Shakespeare, Bacon--heaven knows whom. Those
communications, taking the best, are certainly not a whit of higher
order than would be communications from living persons of fair
talent and education; they are wondrously inferior to what Bacon,
Shakespeare, and Plato said and wrote when on earth. Nor, what is more
noticeable, do they ever contain an idea that was not on the earth
before. Wonderful, therefore, as such phenomena may be (granting them
to be truthful), I see much that philosophy may question, nothing that
it is incumbent on philosophy to deny--viz., nothing supernatural.
They are but ideas conveyed somehow or other (we have not yet
discovered the means) from one mortal brain to another. Whether, in so
doing, tables walk of their own accord, or fiend-like shapes appear in
a magic circle, or bodyless hands rise and remove material objects,
or a Thing of Darkness, such as presented itself to me, freeze our
blood--still am I persuaded that these are but agencies conveyed, as
by electric wires, to my own brain from the brain of another. In some
constitutions there is a natural chemistry, and these constitutions
may produce chemic wonders--in others a natural fluid, call it
electricity, and these may produce electric wonders. But the wonders
differ from Normal Science in this--they are alike objectless,
purposeless, puerile, frivolous. They lead on to no grand results; and
therefore the world does not heed, and true sages have not cultivated
them. But sure I am, that of all I saw or heard, a man, human as
myself, was the remote originator; and I believe unconsciously to
himself as to the exact effects produced, for this reason: no two
persons, you say, have ever told you that they experienced exactly the
same thing. Well, observe, no two persons ever experience exactly the
same dream. If this were an ordinary imposture, the machinery would
be arranged for results that would but little vary; if it were a
supernatural agency permitted by the Almighty, it would surely be
for some definite end. These phenomena belong to neither class; my
persuasion is, that they originate in some brain now far distant; that
that brain had no distinct volition in anything that occurred; that
what does occur reflects but its devious, motley, ever-shifting,
half-formed thoughts; in short, that, it has been but the dreams of
such a brain put into action and invested with a semi-substance. That
this brain is of immense power, that it can set matter into movement,
that it is malignant and destructive, I believe; some material force
must have killed my dog; the same force might, for aught I know, have
sufficed to kill myself, had I been as subjugated by terror as
the dog--had my intellect or my spirit given me no countervailing
resistance in my will."

"It killed your dog! that is fearful! indeed it is strange that no
animal can be induced to stay in that house; not even a cat. Rats and
mice are never found in it."

"The instincts of the brute creation detect influences deadly to their
existence. Man's reason has a sense less subtle, because it has
a resisting power more supreme. But enough; do you comprehend my
theory?"

"Yes, though imperfectly--and I accept any crotchet (pardon the word),
however odd, rather than embrace at once the notion of ghosts and
hobgoblins we imbibed in our nurseries. Still, to my unfortunate house
the evil is the same. What on earth can I do with the house?"

"I will tell you what I would do. I am convinced from my own internal
feelings that the small unfurnished room at right angles to the door
of the bedroom which I occupied, forms a starting-point or receptacle
for the influences which haunt the house; and I strongly advise you to
have the walls opened, the floor removed--nay, the whole room pulled
down. I observe that it is detached from the body of the house, built
over the small back-yard, and could be removed without injury to the
rest of the building."

"And you think, if I did that----"

"You would cut off the telegraph wires. Try it, I am so persuaded that
I am right, that I will pay half the expense if you will allow me to
direct the operations."

"Nay, I am well able to afford the cost; for the rest, allow me to
write to you."

About ten days afterwards I received a letter from Mr. J----, telling
me that he had visited the house since I had seen him; that he had
found the two letters I had described, replaced in the drawer from
which I had taken them; that he had read them with misgivings like my
own; that he had instituted a cautious inquiry about the woman to whom
I rightly conjectured they had been written. It seemed that thirty-six
years ago (a year before the date of the letters) she had married,
against the wish of her relations, an American of very suspicious
character; in fact, he was generally believed to have been a pirate.
She herself was the daughter of very respectable tradespeople, and had
served in the capacity of a nursery governess before her marriage. She
had a brother, a widower, who was considered wealthy, and who had one
child of about six years old. A month after the marriage, the body of
this brother was found in the Thames, near London Bridge; there seemed
some marks of violence about his throat, but they were not deemed
sufficient to warrant the inquest in any other verdict than that of
"found drowned."

The American and his wife took charge of the little boy, the deceased
brother having by his will left his sister the guardian of his only
child--and in event of the child's death, the sister inherited. The
child died about six months afterwards--it was supposed to have been
neglected and ill-treated. The neighbours deposed to have heard it
shriek at night. The surgeon who had examined it after death, said
that it was emaciated as if from want of nourishment, and the body was
covered with livid bruises. It seemed that one winter night the child
had sought to escape--crept out into the back-yard--tried to scale the
wall--fallen back exhausted, and been found at morning on the stones
in a dying state. But though there was some evidence of cruelty,
there was none of murder; and the aunt and her husband had sought to
palliate cruelty by alleging the exceeding stubbornness and perversity
of the child, who was declared to be half-witted. Be that as it may,
at the orphan's death the aunt inherited her brother's fortune. Before
the first wedded year was out, the American quitted England abruptly,
and never returned to it. He obtained a cruising vessel, which was
lost in the Atlantic two years afterwards. The widow was left in
affluence: but reverses of various kinds had befallen her: a bank
broke--an investment failed--she went into a small business and became
insolvent--then she entered into service, sinking lower and lower,
from housekeeper down to maid-of-all-work--never long retaining a
place, though nothing decided against her character was ever alleged.
She was considered sober, honest, and peculiarly quiet in her ways;
still nothing prospered with her. And so she had dropped into the
workhouse, from which Mr. J---- had taken her, to be placed in charge
of the very house which she had rented as mistress in the first year
of her wedded life.

Mr. J---- added that he had passed an hour alone in the unfurnished
room which I had urged him to destroy, and that his impressions of
dread while there were so great, though he had neither heard nor seen
anything, that he was eager to have the walls bared and the floors
removed as I had suggested. He had engaged persons for the work, and
would commence any day I would name.

The day was accordingly fixed. I repaired to the haunted house--we
went into the blind dreary room, took up the skirting, and then
the floors. Under the rafters, covered with rubbish, was found a
trap-door, quite large enough to admit a man. It was closely nailed
down, with clamps and rivets of iron. On removing these we descended
into a room below, the existence of which had never been suspected.
In this room there had been a window and a flue, but they had been
bricked over, evidently for many years. By the help of candles
we examined this place; it still retained some mouldering
furniture--three chairs, an oak settle, a table--all of the fashion of
about eighty years ago. There was a chest of drawers against the wall,
in which we found, half-rotted away, old-fashioned articles of a man's
dress, such as might have been worn eighty or a hundred years ago by a
gentleman of some rank--costly steel buckles and buttons, like those
yet worn in court-dresses, a handsome court sword--in a waistcoat
which had once been rich with gold-lace, but which was now blackened
and foul with damp, we found five guineas, a few silver coins, and
an ivory ticket, probably for some place of entertainment long since
passed away. But our main discovery was in a kind of iron safe fixed
to the wall, the lock of which it cost us much trouble to get picked.

In this safe were three shelves, and two small drawers. Ranged on the
shelves were several small bottles of crystal, hermetically stopped.
They contained colourless volatile essences, of the nature of which
I shall only say that they were not poisons-- phosphor and ammonia
entered into some of them. There were also some very curious glass
tubes, and a small pointed rod of iron, with a large lump of
rock-crystal, and another of amber--also a loadstone of great power.

In one of the drawers we found a miniature portrait set in gold, and
retaining the freshness of its colours most remarkably, considering
the length of time it had probably been there. The portrait was that
of a man who might be somewhat advanced in middle life, perhaps
forty-seven or forty-eight.

It was a remarkable face--a most impressive face. If you could fancy
some mighty serpent transformed into man, preserving in the human
lineaments the old serpent type, you would have a better idea of that
countenance than long descriptions can convey: the width and flatness
of frontal--the tapering elegance of contour disguising the strength
of the deadly jaw--the long, large, terrible eye, glittering and green
as the emerald--and withal a certain ruthless calm, as if from the
consciousness of an immense power.

Mechanically I turned round the miniature to examine the back of it,
and on the back was engraved a pentacle; in the middle of the pentacle
a ladder, and the third step of the ladder was formed by the date
1765. Examining still more minutely, I detected a spring; this, on
being pressed, opened the back of the miniature as a lid. Within-side
the lid were engraved, "Marianna to thee--Be faithful in life and in
death to----." Here follows a name that I will not mention, but it
was not unfamiliar to me. I had heard it spoken of by old men in my
childhood as the name borne by a dazzling charlatan who had made a
great sensation in London for a year or so, and had fled the country
in the charge of a double murder within his own house--that of his
mistress and his rival. I said nothing of this to Mr. J----, to whom
reluctantly I resigned the miniature.

We had found no difficulty in opening the first drawer within the iron
safe; we found great difficulty in opening the second: it was not
locked, but it resisted all efforts, till we inserted in the chinks
the edge of a chisel. When we had thus drawn it forth, we found a very
singular apparatus in the nicest order. Upon a small thin book, or
rather tablet, was placed a saucer of crystal; this saucer was filled
with a clear liquid--on that liquid floated a kind of compass, with a
needle shifting rapidly round; but instead of the usual points of a
compass were seven strange characters, not very unlike those used by
astrologers to denote the planets. A peculiar, but not strong nor
displeasing odour, came from this drawer, which was lined with a wood
that we afterwards discovered to be hazel. Whatever the cause of this
odour, it produced a material effect on the nerves. We all felt
it, even the two workmen who were in the room--a creeping tingling
sensation from the tips of the fingers to the roots of the hair.
Impatient to examine the tablet, I removed the saucer. As I did so the
needle of the compass went round and round with exceeding swiftness,
and I felt a shock that ran through my whole frame, so that I dropped
the saucer on the floor. The liquid was spilt--the saucer was
broken--the compass rolled to the end of the room--and at that instant
the walls shook to and fro, as if a giant had swayed and rocked them.

The two workmen were so frightened that they ran up the ladder by
which we had descended from the trap-door; but seeing that nothing
more happened, they were easily induced to return.

Meanwhile I had opened the tablet: it was bound in plain red leather,
with a silver clasp; it contained but one sheet of thick vellum, and
on that sheet were inscribed, within a double pentacle, words in old
monkish Latin, which are literally to be translated thus: "On all that
it can reach within these walls--sentient or inanimate, living or
dead--as moves the needle, so work my will! Accursed be the house, and
restless be the dwellers therein."

We found no more. Mr. J---- burnt the tablet and its anathema. He
razed to the foundations the part of the building containing the
secret room with the chamber over it. He had then the courage
to inhabit the house himself for a month, and a quieter,
better-conditioned house could not be found in all London.
Subsequently he let it to advantage, and his tenant has made no
complaints.

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pausanias, the Spartan, by Lord Lytton

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUSANIAS, THE SPARTAN ***

This file should be named 8573-8.txt or 8573-8.zip

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Marc D'Hooghe and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

